I 


I 


' * 


■'N;. 

Vi':-'"  '-  'V 


r.  ■ 


p' 

■ ■ 


. \ 


. "I  •. 


A:  . ...  , , 


rV.P; 

' ' Pi-y- 


/ 


f 


1 


* ^ 


1 


f 


> 

V 


'I- 


I 


♦ 

THE 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA 

or 


TEANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH 
BY 

N.  Chidambaeam  Iyee^  B.  A.,  F.  T.  S. 


FOUNDER 

OF  THE 

Tieuvadi  Jottstantea  Sabha, 


MADURA : 

Printed  at  the  Soutb  Indian  Press 

1884 


■ 0 r d-  Y ,,  ^/e -(C  t<b  ' 


• 6 c(go\{ 


/I v/-  . A*'",  , Y"^'^  ,j^\r 


t 


i 


5 


t 


■m:* 
-■«*'■ 
A ;-  ■ 


2)3.0  a 


TO 


§ r a It  m a t 

tanda'lai  seetarama  josier 

THE  MOST  CELEBRATED  ASTROLOGER 

OF 


SOUTHEEN  INDIA 

THIS  WORK 

IS  MOST  RESPECTFULLY  DEDICATED 

AS  A TOKEN  OF  AFFECTION  AND  ESTEEM 


BY  HIS  HUMBLE  STUDENT 


THE  TRANSLATOR. 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2017  with  funding  from 
Wellcome  Library 


https://archive.org/details/b29353130 


PREFACE. 


BharA-TA  Va^isha  has  long  continued  to  be  the  centre  of 
attraction  not  only  in  respect  of  its  wealth  and  civilization 
but  in  that  of  its  intellectual  advancement.  To  it  converged, 
as  to  a common  focus , the  eyes  of  foreigners  from  the  earliest 
period  of  the  world's  history.  It  was  the  one  fountain  of 
knowledge  from  which  issued  streams  to  water  distant  lands 
of  ignorance  at  every  point  of  the  compass^  now  yielding 
abundance  of  intellectual  harvest.  Time  was  when  Aryan 
wisdom  shone  resplendent^  and,  from  its  eminence,  dazzled 
the  eyes  of  distant  nations — distant  geographically  and  distant 
chronologically, — illumined  every  corner  of  the  intellectual 
horizon  and  served  as  a beacon,  lighting  the  paths  of  erring 
travellers.  History  is  puzzled  in  its  attempt  to  reach  the 
date  of  Aryan  civilization.  Antiquarians  are  at  logger-heads 
in  their  conclusions  touching  the  age  of  Aryan  learning. 
Though  at  loggerheads  most  of  the  Christian  antiquarians  take 
care  not  to  assign  to  any  Indian  event  dates  earlier  than  what 
is  permissible  under  their  Biblical  Chronology. 

Now  it  is  well  known  that  Aryan  learning  dates  from  the 
remotest  antiquity.  The  Aryans  have  cultivated  almost  every 
department  of  knowledge.  As  the  art  of  printing  was  un- 
known a large  proportion  of  Aryan  literature  has  been  washed 
into  oblivion  by  the  mighty  wave  of  time.  Not  a few  remain. 

Like  stranded  wrecks  the  tide  returning  hoarse 

To  sweep  them  from  our  sight". 

unless  rescued  from  their  fate.  Our  excellent  Government 
are  now  laudably  working  in  this  direction.  But  most  of  the 
Hindus,  of  the  present  day,  can  neither  use  the  books  them- 


fr  « 

11 

selves  nor  will  they  allow  foreigners  to  interfere  with  their 
sacred  literature.* * 

The  public  can  therefore  do  much  if  their  eyes  could  only 
be  opened  to  the  importance  of  the  subject.  Most  of  the  Eng- 
lish knowing  natives  hardly  know  what  these  books  treat  of. 
I have  many  a time  astonished  young  Collegians  and  graduates 
by  quoting  from  Hindu  astronomers  and  mathematicians^  and 
they  were  surprised  to  find  that  the  Aryans  knew  what  the  Eu- 
ropeans know  forgetting  that  these  sciences  were  taken  to  the 
west  from  here.f 

Now  it  has  come  to  my  knowledge  that  in  nany  Hindu 
families  whole  libraries^  for  want  of  inspection^  are  now  being 
feasted  on  by  moths  and  white  ants  and  large  quantities  have 
already  been  emptiedi  nto  the  dustbins,  the  decay  having 
gone  too  far  I know  that  at  this  moment  over  50  books  are 
being  exposed  to  sun  and  rain  in  a wellknown  family  here 
and  1 hear  they  have  remained  in  that  state  for  over  four 
years.  This  meritorious  act  is  no  doubt  due  to  the  circum- 
stance that  the  present  owners  of  the*  books  have  begun  to 
taste  the  sweets  of  English  education,  while  their  ancestors 
appear  to  have  been  men  of  learning.  My  attempts  to  rescue 
them  from  further  ruin  proved  a complete  failure.  The  books 
appear  to  have,  by  a peculiar  process,  melted  together  and 
formed  into  one  brittle  mass.  Similar  injuries  to  Aryan  lite- 
rature are  more  or  less  going  on  all  over  India.  English  edu- 
cation, like  Aaron^s  rod,  appears  to  have  devoured  up  every 
other  education  and  it  has  spread  now  throughout  the  land. 


* And  not  without  reason;  it  may  not  be  out  of  place  to  quote 
here  a little  from  Louis  Jacolliot’s  “ Bible  in  India 

“ The  Reverend  Fathers,  Jesuits,  Franciscans,  Stranger-missions  and 
other  corporations  unite  with  touching  harmony  in  India  to  accomplish  a 
work  of  Vandalism,  which  it  is  right  to  denounce  as  well  fco  the  learned  world, 
as  to  Orientalists.  Everj  manuscript,  every  Sanscrit  work  that  falls  into  their 
hands,  is  immediately  condemned  and  consigned  to  the  flames.  Needless  to 
say  that  the  choice  of  these  gentlemen  always  falls  from  preference  open 
those  of  highest  antiquity,  and  whose  authenticity  may  appear  incontestable.” 

* * * * 

“ Every  new  arrival  receives  a formal  order,  so  to  dispose  of  all  that  may 
fall  into  his  hands.  Happily  the  Brahmins  do  not  open  to  them  the  secret 
stores  of  their  immense  literary  wealth,  philosophic  and  religious”. 

f It  may  be  mentioned  here,  in  passing,  that  these  Sciences,  so  much 
neglected  by  the  State,  stand  a fair  chance  of  being  revived  as,  at  my  sugges- 
tion a Sanskrit  Mathematical  class  has  recently  been  opened  in  the  Mahara- 
jah’s free  Sanskrit  College , Tiruvadi,  Tanjore  District,  and  placed  under  the 
management  of  Brahma  Sree  Sunderaswara  Srouthy,  Hindu  Astronomer  and 
Almanac  publisher. 


Ill 


In  the  humble  hope  that  the  progressing  ruin  might  be  in 
a measure  retarded^  it  is  proposed  to  tell  the  present  Indian 
generation,  in  the  language  in  which  they  will  all  and 
can  all  hear  that,  if  they  would  exert  a little,  they  might  rescue 
from  ruin  avast  amount  of  splendid  Aryan  literature:  in  other 
w'ords,  it  is  proposed  to  publish  an  English  translation  of  Aryan 
Miscellany.  As  the  prosperity  of  a nation  depends  on  its 
literature,  the  public  are  requested  to  form  into  societies  for 
the  collection  and  preservation  of  Aryan  works  and  for  the 
printing  of  the  more  important  of  them.  They  will  also  kindly 
communicate  to  me  the  names  and  particulars  ot  Aryan  works 
falling  within  their  notice. 


The  Samhita’ series  is  taken  up  first  as  being  best  calcu- 
lated to  awaken  public  interest  and  arrest  public  attention  on 
account  of  the  interesting  variety  of  the  subjects  treated  of. 


Pi 


7m 


. •■■•It 


i .J^ 


J 


■■f  ,1 


S' 


V . 


i'b 


. 


F'\-  ‘iVf'.t-— 

-J'*  . V ' 

■ 


I -K 


1^V7  ' , ‘ Jf/u^ 


4li  <;•.''  -'tjrr Fi  ’&ii| ''■ 


; a,  h.,  . ■!(-„*•>'»'!«;  aSi- 


I*  V ■»^;^"*:r-n  ’/ 


f-' 


. -,^4^'  ca- 

• * ■ ^^Yir^Ai.  ■ •*  ^ 

' • • '•  JM: 

. . ..^■"  f . ^5  / - ■ ■ i.i' 


Ti'nr.^, 


■/  . 


r - 1 v:.  I,  ^ 


■^v-  \ 


iJr-^^,  *7^ 


^ VI 


^ 1 «,  * 

'''i^’‘-^£k'  ■ ':  ■? 

4*v  ,/• 

- . ' ' • 

■~-^-^0i  .^?''-‘!v;;a' »•  -“ii‘ 


■■'  ' ■ ^•- 


ir,-' 


V.’t./'^ 


/:•  - .f 


INTRODUCTION. 


Vaeaha  Mihira  was  a native  of  Avanti  and  the  son  of 
Aditjadasa  who  was  an  astronomer  and  from  whom  he  recei- 
ved his  education  as  he  himself  tells  us  in  his  Brihat  Jata- 
ka  (Chap.  XXVI  Verse  5).  The  da^e  of  his  birth  is  involved 
in  obscurity.  It  is  the  practice  of  all  the  Hindu  astronomers  to 
give  this  information  in  their  works  on  astronomy  ; but  unfortu 
nately  Varaha  Mihira^s  work  on  astronomy,  known  as  the  Pan* 
chasidhantika,  is  now  lost*  beyond  all  hope  of  recovery.  The 
popular  notion  is  that  he  was  one  of  the  12  gems  of  the  Court 
of  Vikramarka.  Now  Vikrama  Era,  as  we  find  from 'the 
Hindu  calendar,  dates  from  56  B.  C.  whereas  Varaha  Mihira 
is  considered  to  have  flourished  in  the  sixth  century  after 
Christ.  So  the  Vikramarka  of  the  first  century  before  Christ 
must  be  different  from  the  Vikramarka  of  the  6th  century 
after  Christ,  unless  we  go  to  the  length  of  believing  that 
Vikramarka  reigned,  according  to  the  Hindu  legend,  for  a 
thousand  years.  We  are  not  without  parallel  instances  in  the 
Christian  Bible  in  which  Enos  is  said  to  have  lived  905  years, 
Cainan  910  years,  Seth  912  years,  Adam  930  years,  Noah  950 
years,  Jared  962  years  and  Methusala  969  years;  and  yet 
poor  non-biblical  Vikramarka  is  grudged  a comparatively 
small  matter  of  500  years. 

Now  A.  D.  505  is  considered  by  some  to  be  the  date  of 
Varaha  iviihira^s  birth  and  by  others  to  be  that  of  his  Pancha- 
sidhantika,  and  A.  T),  587  is  thought  to  be  the  date  of  his 
death.  It  is  also  said  that  Varaha  Mihira  has  quoted 
from  Aryabhatta;  that  Aryabhatta  was  born  in  476  A.  1). 
and  that  this  circumstance  goes  to  prove  that  the  dates 
given  above  are  probably  not  incorrect.  We  shall  now  exa- 
mine how  far  these  dates  are  supported  by  evidence  to  be 
obtained  from  Varaha  Mihira's  own  works- — a circumstance 
which,  curiously  enough,  appears  to  have  escaped  the  atten- 
tion of  even  such  eminent  scholars  as  Colebrook,  Davis,  Sir 
William  Jones  and  others: 


* Our  subscribers,  especially  those  of  N.  W.  P.  and  Bengal,  aro 
requested  to  give  the  matter  some  attention  and  try  if  they  can  procnr# 
a copy  of  this  excellent  work. 


VI 


In  verse  2 of  Chapter  III  of  his  Brahat  Samhita  Yaraha 
Mihira  says:- — 

At  present  the  Solsticial  points  coincide  with  the 

beginning  of  Karkataka  (Sign  Cancer)and  with  the  begin- 
ning of  Makara  (Sign  Capricornus).’’ 

Tb-’S  amounts  to  saying  that  the  Vernal  equinox,  which  is 
midway  between  the  Solstices  (90®  from  each),  was  at  the 
commencement  of  Mesha  (Sign  Aries)  i.  e.  coincided  with  the 
Star  Eevati  where  the  fixed  Hindu  Zodiac  commences.  The 
precession  of  the  equinoxes  was  known  to  the  Hindus 
long  before  it  was  known  to  thci  Europeans,  although  Hindu 
astronomers  are  not  agreed  as  to  the  nature  of  its  course — » 
some  asserting  that  it  oscillates  on  both  sides  of  the  star 
Kevati  while  others  that  it  makes  a complete  revolution  round 
the  heavens,  a point  about  which  even  European  astronomers 
have  not  arrived  at  any  conclusion.  Now  this  point  is  at 
present  about  20°  to  the  west  of  the  star  Eevati.  Its 
annual  rate  of  motion  is  known  and  the  increment  in  the  rate 
is  also  known  ; so  that  by  a process  of  simple  calculation  we 
can  arive  at  the  period  when  the  point  must  h ive  coincided 
with  the  star  Eevati.  Now  unfortunately,  the  exact  distance 
between  the  Vernal  Equinox  and  the  star  Eevati  is  not  known, 
and  cannot  be  determined  from  observation  as  the  star  (which 
the  Hindu  astronomers  say  was  on  the  ecliptic)  appears  some 
how  to  have  disappeared.  Mr.  Kero  Latchmana  Chatrai  M,  A. 
of  Poona  has  adopted  a star,  known  as  the  Zeeta  Piscium 
(which  however  is  not  on  the  ecliptic)  as  the  Eevati  of  the 
Eindus.  According  to  him  the  Ayanamsam,  (the  distance  bet- 
ween the  vernal  Equinox  and  the  star  Eevati),  on  the  first  Janu- 
ary I8h3  was  18°  14"  20"".  According  to  the  late  Mr. 
C.  Eeghunathachariar  of  Madras,(  after  him,  Messrs.  Vencate- 
swara  Heekshitar  and  Sundereswara  iSrouthy  of  Southern 
India)  and  Mr.  Bapu  Deva  Sastry  of  Benares,  the  Ayanamsam 
on  the  1st  January  1883,  was  21°  2"  39""  and  21°  58'  29'" 
respectively*  But  as  these  lengths  have  been  arbitrarily 
assumed  they  may  be  dismissed  as  deserving  of  no  consider- 
ation in  this  place,  I have  discovered  it  to  be 20°  2 4"  15'"  on 
the  above  date  and  my  discovery  rests  on  the  Hruva  Nadi, 
a work  of  Satyachariar,  a great  astronomer.  For  particulars 
of  this  disputed  question  the  reader  is  referred  to  my  article 
on  the  Hmdu  Zodiac  published  in  the  April  (1883  ) issueof 
The  Theosophist. 

Now  we  will  calculate  Varaha  Mihira's  time  from  the 


• • 

Vll 

lengths  of  the  Ayanarasam  as  adopted  by  Mr.  K.  L.  Cliatrai  and 
as  discovered  by  me.  The  question  is  one  of  Arithmetical 
progression.  We  will  suppose, 

a—  rate  of  motion  of  Vernal  Equinox  when  it  coincided 
with  the  star  Kevati. 

the  annual  increment  in  tlie  rate. 

Z=  the  last  term  or  rate  of  motion  on  the  first  January 
18e3.  ' 

sz=i  the  sum  of  the  terms  or  the  length  of  the  Ayanamsam. 

n = number  of  terms  or  number  of  years  required. 

We  have  the  following  series : 

a,  a + d,  a ■{-2d,  a 4- 3d,  ai-{n — l)d. 

Z=a+(n — l)d.  a — I — (n — l)d. 

s={a  + Z)’i=■[^— + 

= / 2?— {«— 

2s—{2l  + d)n — dn^. 
dn'^  — {2l  + d]n  + 2s  = 0. 

2l  + d±  K (2Z  + d)2_4.  d.  2s. 

’*=  2d. 

where  34. 

d = 0-'\  00024. 

5=20°  24'  15"  or  18°  14'  20". 

Substituting  these  values,  we  get  n=  14,66  and  4,17,368 
years  , or  = 1310  and  4,17,523  years,  before  first  January 
1883  where  the  bigger  figures  may  be  rejected  as  they  refer 
to  the  position  of  the  vernal  Equinox  in  its  second  revolution. 
8o  that  Varaha  Mihira^s  time  is  found  to  be  eitherl882-l466= 
416  A.  D.  or  1882 — 1310—572  A.  D.,  according  to  me  or  Mr. 
K.  L.  Chatrai  respectively.  Now  it  is  true  that  572  A.  D. 
is  in  support  of  the  supposed  dates,  above  given,  of  Varaha  Mi. 
hira’s  birth  and  death.  But  I cannot  bring  myself  to  believe 
that  Zeeta  piscium  was  the  Kevati  of  the  Hindus,  for  this  sim- 
ple reasonAhat  it  is  not  on  the  ecliptic.  Several  st'nrs  of  compa- 


Vin 

ratively  less  importance;,  stated  by  tbe  Hindu  astromomers 
to  be  on  the  ecliptic  aro  found  to  be  so  when  examined  with 
the  aid  of  modern  astronomical  instruments.  It  is  therefore 
unreasonable  to  suppose  that  Hindu  astronomers  could  have 
blundered  in  describing  the  position  of  the  star  Revati.  As 
regards  the  difficulty  that  V^araha  Mihira  has  quoted  from  Arya 
Bhatta — which  quotation  must  be  in  his  Panchasidhantika  now 
lost  — it  is  not  improbable  that  the  quotation  is  from  Vrid- 
harya  bhateeam. 

It  may  be  remarked  here  that  when,  in  his  work  on 
Samhita,  Varaha  Mihira  refers  to  the  position  of  the  planets  in 
the  several  signs  of  the  zodiac,  he  refers  to  the  fixed  zodiac 
of  the  Hindus  commencing  from  the  star  Revati  and  not  to 
the  shifting  zodiac  of  the  western  astronomers  which  always 
commences  at  the  moving  vernal  Equinox, 

The  whole  book  is  one  huge  attempt  to  interpret  the 
language  of  Nature  and  ascertain  its  bearing  on  the  fortunes  of 
men  and  nations.  Where  the  lapidary  discovers 
a diamond,  the  simple  negro  finds  apiece  of  glass;  where  the 
botanist  discovers  a simple  with  valuable  properties  the 
farmer  sees  a thistle.  Nature  has  been  found  to  speak  in  a 
thousand  ways  at  every  moment  of  time  and  the  Hindus  from 
the  earliest  times  have  learnt  to  hear  and  understand  her 
language.  This  language,  the  modern  scientific  world,  at  present 
ignores,  and  with  the  simplicity  of  a negro  or  a farmer  can 
even  afford  to  laugh  at  the  supposed  ignorance  of  the  Hindus, 
^^What  is  truth?  asked  jesting  Pilate,  but  would  not  wait  for 
an  answePk  have  not  the  patience  to  try  and  see  what 

amount  of  truth  there  is  in  the  Hindu  interpretation  of 
Naturehs  language. 

We  will  take  a few  instances:  over  1500  years  ago  Varaha 
Mihira  (who  only  quotes  the  opinion  of  writers  that  went  before 
him)  said  that  solar  spots  indicate  famine  in  the  land.  Phis 
was  found  to  be  the  case  during  the  famine  of  1876— 77. 

Again  it  is  generally  known  that  all  India  observe  anxi- 
ously the  course  of  the  moon  with  respect  to  the  four  stars  of 
the  10th  constellation  {Maglia)  when  the  sun  is  in  the  sign 
Aquarius  i-e  from  about  February  10  to  March  10,  with  a view 
to  ascertain  the  future  agricultural  prospects  of  the  laud:  the 
market  price  of  food-grains  is  at  once  lowered  or  raised  accor- 
ding as  the  moon^s  course  lies  to  the  south  of  the  lour  stars 
or  more  and  more  to  the  north  of  the  southernmost  star.  It 


r 


II 


i9  also  stated  that  if  the  moon  should  pass  to  the  north  of  all 
the  four  stars  the  world  would  be  at  an  end. 

Now  astronomers  know  very  well  that  ordinarily  the 
moon  will  never  pass  to  the  north  of  all  the  four  stars.  I may 
also  remark  here  that  in  the  famine  of  1 876 —77  the  moon’s 
course  lay  between  the  northern  most  star  and  the  one  next  to 
it.  We  will  cite  one  more  instance. 

Hindu  astronomers  say  that  if  Saturn  should  enter  the 
constellation  of  Rohini  (dtb)  the  world  would  be  at  an  end. 
The  story  is  thc^t  the  astronomers  of  Hasaratha’s  court 
announced  to  the  prince  the  dreaded  entry  of  Saturn  into  the 
said  constellation  that  the  prince  at  once  flew  in  the  air  and 
stood  before  Sa.tar'n  in  his  orbit  resolved  to  stop  his  course  ; 
that  Saturn,  pleased  with  the  prince’s  boldness,  promised  never 
more  to  enter  the  circle*  Now,  astronomical  calculations 
shew  that  ordinarily  Saturn  will  never  enter  the  said  circle, 
— a circumstance  which  shows  that  the  story  is  simply  intend- 
ed to  cover  an  astronomical  truth.  It  is  a well-known  fact  that 
recently  Saturn  approached  the  circle  to  within  a degree  from 
it  but  did  not  enter  it. 

In  justice  to  the  wisdom  of  the  ancient  Hindus,  who,  for 
ages,  continued  their  observation  and  tabulation  of  the 
phenomena  of  nature,  the  public  will  do  well  to  give  each  mat- 
ter a patient  trial  and  see  what  amount  of  truth  there  is  in 
each  and  not  follow  the  wisdom  of  Alexander  ths  Grreat  who, 
unable  to  untie  the  Gordian  knot,  chose  to  cut  it.  In  the  course 
of  this  work  the  reader  will  find  that  the  author  refers  to 
several  phenomena  which,  within  the  limited  experience  of  the 
modern  scientific  world  might  appear  improbable.  True 
wisdom  consists  iu  patient  investigation  and  not  in  hasty  rejec 
tion. 

It  is  humbly  hoped  that,  if  this  book  were  carefully  studied 
and  its  truths  practically  examined,  the  material  prosperiGy  ot 
the  world  would  be  vastly  improved- 


N.  C. 


I 


) 


. i . 0 <■;?  I.o  ■’  ..f  rfrn^ :.  ...  ..  , 

1 ■ 


V ^ ' 


V,  , r 


-1; 


:-f 


i " j - ; 


- 'I  ' ' »’•  >< 

■ ••  ' . i ' - ^ t ' . 

■ ' ■ •••^ , t-v  K ^ r i . i' 

■•  • , -f'''  ' '■ 

•■  .’i’-h-l  ' Hi,4 

■•'.  > .'  .:‘r 


••r  J . ■ . !..  J;:- 

'.rtV''  'r. 


• i. 


I r 


•■-  ^ It  l. 

. f;- 


• /■'  ’ f 


■;!■■,  .1  ■ 1* 


I '*! • I !!■  V*.  . :r  • i i';-- 


i •:  'xv;*  * ’ . V/- 

* ^4  <"1'. 

. .1. ■>  v 


' • . 1 1 . ■». 

I /<,'  ( K-)? ! I ;. 

.,f(. 


I . '■ 


• . _ f 


ni,i.s 

* !(» 

' r,  ■ ' : ! yff'i.' 

V/ 


t . 


«'v . 


h' 


4 i 


i .•,  ■; 
' ■ ' ' ! ■ . 


•y  * ‘ 

V : • ■- 


“f-j  . ■‘V  ( 

s??i5 ' ,>i 


‘J 


!/• 

i ’.  ■ • A . 

’ • ♦ I 1 ^ 1 , 


< .. 

I 

' 


.'U‘.  ■ 


Lt, 


1 V'' 


V -^u. 

■•  ' yyf 

r tr 


{_. 


■ '"t 
> 


I 


CONTENTS 

PAKT  I. 


Ctl,  PAGE. 

on. 

PAGE, 

1.  Introductory  , 

1 

20. 

On  Ashadhi  Voga 

131 

2.  Jyoutishaka,^ 

3' 

27. 

On  the  winds 

133 

3.  On  the  Sun 

12 

28. 

On  immediate  rain 

135 

4.  On  the  Moon  " 

17 

29. 

On  flowers  and  plants 

138 

5.  On  Raliu 

On 

30. 

Oil  twilight  hours 

143 

6.  On  Mara 

40 

31. 

On  Digdaha 

148 

7.  On  Mercui  y 

42 

32. 

On  Earth-quakes 

149 

8.  On  Jupiter 

45 

33. 

On  Ulkas  or  Meteors 

154 

9.  On  Veima 

56 

31. 

On  Halos 

153 

10.  On  Saturn 

63 

35. 

On  ihe  Rain-how 

162 

11.  On  comets  and  the  like 

66 

36. 

On  Gandharva  na^aras 

12.  On  Canopus 

76 

or  cloud  castles 

163 

13.  On  the  Ursa  Major 

80 

37. 

On  Parhelion 

161 

14.  On  Kurma  Vibhaga 

82 

38. 

On  Dust-storms 

194 

15.  On  the  Nakshatras 

88 

39. 

On  Thunder-bolts 

165 

16'  On  the  Planets 

92 

40. 

On  Sasya  Jataka  or  vege- 

17.  On  planetary  conjunc- 

table Horoscopy 

166 

tions 

97 

41. 

On  Commodities 

168 

18.  On  the  Moon’s  conjunc 

- 

42. 

On  the  price  of  Commo- 

tion  with  planets 

106 

dities 

170 

19,  On  Planetary  years 

108 

43. 

On  Indra  Dhwaja  or 

20.  On  Planetary  meetings 

111 

Indra’s  Banner 

172 

21.  On  the  rain-clouds 

113 

44. 

On  the  Lustration  of 

22.  On  Dharana  or  rain  sup 

• 

Arms 

182 

port  days 

120 

45. 

On  the  wag-tail 

186 

23.  On  Rain 

121 

46. 

On  Portents 

ISO 

24.  On  Rohini  Yoga 

123 

47. 

Mavura  Ohitraka  or 

25.  On  Swati  Yoga 

129 

Motely  Miscellany 

262 

PAK,T  II. 


err 

PAGE. 

1. 

On 

Pushyasnana 

1 

2. 

On 

Patta  or  crown  plate 

11 

3. 

On 

the  word 

12 

4, 

Cn 

Ang^  vidya 

16 

5. 

On 

Pimples 

23 

6. 

On 

Hoiise-buiMing 

25 

7. 

On 

Dndor  currents 

43 

8. 

On 

Garden  in  O' 

59 

9. 

On 

Temples 

74 

10. 

On 

durable  Cements 

77 

11. 

On 

Temple  Images 

78 

12. 

On 

Entry  into  the  forest  86 

13. 

On 

the  fixing  of  the  Traa 

L- 

ges  in  Temples 

88 

14. 

On 

the  features  of  Cows  91 

15. 

do 

of  the  Dog 

93 

1^‘. 

do 

of  tlie  Cock 

94 

17. 

do 

of  the  Turtle 

91 

00 

do 

of  the  Goat 

95 

39. 

do 

of  the  Horse 

96 

20. 

do 

of  the  Elephant 

97 

21. 

do 

of  Man 

99 

22. 

On 

the  EiveMahapuru 

shas  or  Great  men 

115 

23. 

On 

the  features  of  Wo- 

men 

121 

24. 

On 

injuries  to  Gar- 

menfs 

125 

25. 

On 

Cbamara 

127 

26. 

On 

Umbrellas 

128 

27. 

On 

the  praise  of  Women! 29 

28. 

On 

Amiability 

132 

29. 

On 

Spermatic  drugs 

1B4 

30, 

On 

Perfume  mixtures 

139 

r 

PAGE. 

31.  On  Sexual  nnion  1.54 

32.  On  Cofa  arid  Seats  IGO 

33.  On  Diamonds  164 

34.  On  Pearls  167 

3.5.  On  Rubies  ] 72 

36.  On  Emeralds  1/3 

37.  On  Lamps  174 

35.  On  Tooth-brush  175 

39.  Omens — general  rules  177 

40.  On  Antarachakra  189 

41.  On  Ominous  cries  196 

42  On  omens  connected 

with  the  dog  202 

43.  do  the  jackal  206 

44.  do  wild  animals  208 

45.  do  the  cow  209 

46.  do  the  hors©  210 

47.  do  the  elephant  212 

48.  On  omens  eonected  with  the 

cawing  of  the  crow  213 

49.  Supplementary  to 

omens  223 


50.  On  Effective  periods  226 

51.  On  the  Constellations  229 

52.  On  the  Tithies  and  Karanas 

[232 

53.  On  the  Marriage  Lagna  234 

54.  On  the  Nakshatras  235 

55.  On  the  Divisions  of  the  Zo- 

diac 238 

56.  On  Marrigaes  239 

57.  On  tbe  motions  of  the  pla 

nets 

58.  On  tl  e Nakrhatra- 

pinnha  255 

59.  Conclusion  257 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


- CHAPTER.  I 

Introductory. 

1.  Glorv  be  to  the  Sun  who  is  the  author  and  the  Soul  o£ 
the  Universe^  the  ornament  of  the  firmament  and  who  is  enve- 
loped in  a thousand  rays  of  the  color  of  molten  gold. 

2.  Having  correctly  examined  the  substance  of  the  volumt 
nous  works  of  the  saoes  of  the  past_,  I attempt  to  write  a clear 
treatise  neither  too  long  nor  too  short. 

3.  What  means  the  notion  that  the  works  of  the  Itishia  are 
sound  and  not  so  the  works  of  men  ? In  cases  where  the  matter 
refers  to  no  mantra,  what  is  there  to  choose  between,  when  tha 
meaning  is  the  same  because  the  words  are  different? 

4.  If  Brahma  has  declared  Kshititanaya  divasa  vara 
nashubhakrit^^*  and  man‘^Kuja  dinamanishtam^^*  what  is  there 
to  choose  between  the  work  of  man  and  that  of  a Deva? 

5.  Having  examined  the  vast  works  thao  have  proceeded 
from  writers  from  Brahma  downwards,  I purpose  to  write  a 
brief  work  embodying  the  substance  of  the  same.  The  task 
is  a pleasing  one  to  me. 

6.  There  was  darkness  (chaos)  in  the  beginning.  Then 
came  water  (into  existence).  On  it  (floated)  a gold  colored 
egg,  the  (divine)  seed  consisting  of  the  Barth  and  the  Firma- 
ment from  which  there  arose  Brahma,  the  creative  agent  with 
the  sun  and  moon  for  his  eyes. 

■ ■ i— -i  ' ■ — ■■  ■ I.,,—  , 

* Both  the  phrases  mean  that  Tuesday  is  an  inauspicious  day  though  ex- 
pressed in  different  words. 


■2 


BeIHAT  SlMHITA. 


[Ch.  1 


7.  Kapila* * * §  says  that  the  Universe  had  its  origin  in  pradha- 
na;  Kanathaf  m drivyaj  and  the  like  ; a few'^  in  kala  (time) I 
'othersli  in  Svabahava  (nature);  and  some§  in  Karma, 

8.  Enough  of  this  (subject  of  Cosmogony)^  on  account  of 
its  vastness.  If  this  question  were  discussed,  it  would  swell 
very  much  in  length.  The  subject  I have  now  to  treat  of  is 
the  Angavinischaya  (Samhita)  section  of  Jotis  Shastra. 

9.  Jotis  Shastra  treats  of  roany  different  subjects  and  con- 
sists  of  three  sections.  The  sages  call  the  whole  by  the  gene- 
ral name  of  Samhita.  This  **section  which  treats  of  the 
motions  of  the  planets  is  called  the  Tantra  Shastra ( Astronomy) ^ 
Another  section  is  the  Hora  Shastra  (Horoscopy).  The  third 
section  is  known  as  the  Angavinischya  Shastra  (Samhita  or 
natural  astrology). 

10.  In  my  work  on  Astronomy,  I have  treated  of  the  he- 
iacal  rising  and  setting  of  the  planets  as  well  as  their  retro- 
grade and  re-retrograde  motions  and  the  like.  In  my  work  on 
Horoscopy  I have  fully  treated  of  nativity,  of  yatra  and  of 
marriage. 

11.  In  the  present  treatise,  I have’rejected  questions  and 
re-questions,  historical  narrations,  unimportant  planetary  phe- 
nomena and  all  that  is  useless;  and  I purpose  to  speak  clearly 
only  of  the  vital  truths  of  the  several  subjects  treated  of. 

* Kapila  was  the  author  of  the  sankhya  Philosophy . 

f Pradhaua  is  a due  proportion  of  the  three  gunas  Satwa,  Raja  and  Tama. 

X Kanatha,  also  called  Kanatha,  which  term  literally  means  the  atomgiver 
d e the  founder  of  the  atomic  theory. 

‘p'  Drvya  : these  are  nine:  earth,  water,  air,  fire,  akas,  Kala  [time]  dik 
[direction],  atma  [the  soul],  and  manas  (the  mind). 

■[[  A few:  these  are  the  Pauranikas. 

§ Others:  these  are  the  Lokayatikas. 

$ Some:  these  are  the  Meemamsakas. 

**  The  Sloka  is  evidently  quoted  from  Varaha  Mihira’s  work  on  Astr®- 
nomy,  known  ag  the  Puncha  Sidhantika  which  appears  to  have  been  lost. 


Cii.  2] 


Bkihat  Samhita. 


5, 


CHAPTER  IT. 

The  Jyoutishaka*. 

We  shall  now  proceed  to  give  a brief  description  of  (the 
qualifications  of)  a Jyoutishaka.  He  must  be  of  noble  birth  and 
of  agreeable  appearance;  meek,  truthful  and  without  jealousy  ; 
of  proportional  limbs  ; of  joints  well  built  and  of  good  growth; 
have  no  physical  d^efects;  be  of  fine  hands,  feet,  nails,  eyes,  chin, 
teeth,  ears,  forehead,  eye-brows  and  head  ; of  fine  physique 
and  of  high,  sonorous  voice. 

Generally  speaking  do  not  virtues  and  vices  follow  the 
body? 

The  virtues: — He  must  be  of  cleanly  habits,  able,  noble-mind- 
ed, eloquent  and  of  originality  and  imagination;  must  possess 
a knowledge  of  place  and  time;  be  meek  and  without  nervousnes 
must  be  difficult  of  conquest  by  his  fellow  students;  must  be 
able  and  devoid  of  vices;  must  be  learned  in  matters  of  expiatory 
ceremonies,  of  Hygeine,  of  Occult  Magic  and  of  ablutions; 
must  be  a worshipper  of  the  Devas  and  an  observer  of  fast  and 
penance;  must  be  of  remarkable  genius  and  capable  of  solving 
any  difficulties  save  in  matters  of  direct  divine  interference;  and 
finally,  he  must  be  learned  in  astronomy,  natural  astrology 
(Samhita)  and  horoscopy. 

In  Astronomy: — He  must  have  studied  the  works  of  Pulisa 
Komaka,  ^asishta,  {durya  and  Pitamaha;  he  must  have  a correct, 
knowledge  of  a Yuga  (43,20,000  Solar  years),  Varusha  (a  solar 
year),  Ayana  (6  solar  months),  Buthu  (2  solar  months),  Masa 
(a  solar  month),  Pahsha  (15  solar  days),  AhoratJira  (a  solar 
day),Yama  (one-eighth  of  a solar  day),  Muhurtha  (one-thirtieth 
of  a solar  day),  A'adi' (one-sixtieth  of  a solar  day  or  24  minutes), 
finadi{ojiQ  sixtieth  of  a Nadi  or  24  seconds),  Pra?za  (4  seconds) 
Tr7^i'i(33,750th  of  a second)  and  parts  of  a Truti  and  other 


* One  who  is  versed  in  Samhita,  Astronomy  and  Horoscopy. 


Brihat  Samhita. 


[Ch.  2. 


divisions  of  time  and  also  of  divisions  of  space. 

He  must  have  a clear  knowledge  of  the  Causes  of  Solar, 
Savana,  * Siderial  and  Lunar  months  as  well  as  of  intercalary 
lunations  and  intercalary  days. 

He  must  have  a knrwledge  of  tho  beginning  and  end  of 
ShasJityabda  (a  cycle  of  60  years),  a yuga  (5  years),  Yarsha 
(a  year),  Masa  (a  months,  Thina  (a  day)  and  hova  (an  hour) 
and  of  their  lords. 

He  must  know  the  solar  and  other  divisions  of  time,  their 
similarity  and  dissimilarity  and  must  be  capable  of  propound- 
ing the  fitness  or  unfitness  of  each  for  particular  purposes  : 
these  divisions  c£  time  are,  of  Man,  of  Devas,  of  Jupiter,  of 
Pithris,  of  Star  (Siderial)  of  the  Sun  (solar),  of  the  Moon 
(lunar of  the  Earth  (terrestrial),  and^  of  Brahma. 

If  the  methods  of  calculation  given  in  the  five  Astrono- 
:mical  works  mentioned  above  should  produce  different  results 
he  must  be  able  to  calculate  correctly  the  places  of  the  sun 
and  planets  by  actual  observation  (by  means  of  shadow  and 
water  level  and  with  the  help  of  Astronomical  instruments) 
of  the  termination  of  their  ayana  (northward  and  southward 
course,)  of  their  being  due  east  to  the  observer  after  rising  and 
of  their  altitude  at  any  time. 

He  must  know  the  reason  for  the  correction  required  for 
the  conversion  of  the  heliocentric  into  geocentric  longitude 
mud  vice  versa ; the  causes  of  the  ayana  of  the  sun  and  planets 
and  of  their  slow  and  rapid  movements  at  different  times. 

In  solar  and  lunar  eclipses,  he  must  be  able  to  calculate 
the  times  of  the  commencement  and  end  of  the  eclipses,  the 
places  of  first  and  last  contact,  the  magnitude  and  duration  of 

, * SOtimes  the  interval  from  sun  rise  to  sunrise. 

t Vide  slokas  23  and  24  Chapter  VIII. 


Ch.  2.] 


Beihat  Samhita. 


5 


the  eclipse ; in  total  eclipses,  he  must  be  able  to  calculate  the 
time  between  middle  eclipse  and  the  beginning  or  end  of  total 
phase,  (this  period  being  technically  known  as  Yimarda).  He 
must  also  know  the  color  of  the  eclipsed  lunar  disc.  He  must 
be  able  to  calculate  before  hand  the  times  of  the  Moon^s  con- 
junction with  the  ^planets  as  well  as  of  planetary  conjunctions. 

He  must  know  the  length,  in  yojana  (5  miles),  of  the  daily 
motion  of  each  platiet  in  its  orbit  and  of  the  orbit  itself,  and 
generally  the  length,  in  yojana,  in  every  case. 

He  must  know  the  Earth’s  revolution  round  the  sun  and 
its  rotation  round  its  axis;  its  shape,  size  and  the  like;  the 
latitude  of  a place  and  its  complement;  the  nature  of  the  hour 
circle;  the  chdra  dala  Jcala  [the  difference  between  6 hours  and 
half  a day],  the  times  of  the  rising  of  the  Zodiacal  signs.  He 
must  also  be  able  to  calculate  time  from  shadow  and  shadow 
from  time  and  to  convert  longitude  into  right  ascension  and 
right  ascension  into  longitude. 

He  must  be  able  to  meet  objections  and  questions  in  clear  and 
distinct  language  and  must  be  capable  of  explaining  the  science 
in  its  purity  in  just  the  same  way  as  separating  the  pure  gold 
[from  all  dross]  and  making  it  capable  of  retaining  its  value 
when  submitted  to  the  touch  stone,  to  the  fii-e  and  to  the  hammer# 

How  can  one,  who  is  incapable  of  entrapping  others  with 
a hard  question  or  of  answering  any  that  is  put  to  himself  or 
of  explaining  his  views  to  his  students,  expect  to  become  an  as- 
tronomer? 

The  fool  whose  exposition  is  at  variance  with  the  text  and 
whose  illustration  is  opposed  to  such  exposition  is  not  unlike 
one  who  addressing  Brahma  as  Parvatti  (Goddess)  begins  his 
praise  by  recounting  the  vices  of  a prostitute. 

The  predictions  of  one,  who  knows  astronomy  well,  who  is 
able  to  calculate  the  exact  Lagna  with  such  helps  as  the  sha- 


6 Brihat  Samhita.  [Ch.  2 

dow,  water  and  astronomical  instruments  and  who  is  well  ver- 
ed  in  horoscopy  will  never  fail. 

Yishnugupta  says  ^^flying  with  the  speed  of  the  wind^  one 
might  find  it  possible  to  cross  to  the  ocean^s  opposite  shore;  but 
a non-Rishi  can  never,  even  mentally,  reach  the  opposite  shore 
of  the  vast  ocean  of  jotishsastra^^ 

And  in  horoscopy  * * * § the  eTyoutishaka  must  know  such  divi- 
sions of  space  as  rasi  (a  sign  of  Zodiac  or  a space  of  30°),  hora 
(15°  or  half  a sign),  drekkana  (10°  or  one  third  of  a sign),  navam 
salca  (3°  20'or  one  ninth  ofa  sign.)jdvadasamsaJc(i  (2°  30'  or  one 
twelfth  of  a sign),  or  one  thirtieth  of  a sign), 

and  their  strength  or  weakness  considered  horoscopically  ; 
he  must  know  the  horoscopic  strength  of  the  planets  with 
respect  to  their  dih-f  (direction),  stanaX  (place),  Kala,^ 
[time],  Cheshta^  [motions,  conjunctions  and  the  like]. 

He  must  know  the  temperament  of  the  planets  and  the 
parts  of  the  body  lorded  over  by  each;  the  mineral  division 


* Here  follow  a number  of  technical  terms  whit  h might  appear  forbid» 
ing  to  persons  not  conversant  with  the  subject. 

f Mercury  and  Jupiter  have  dih  bala  when  situated  in  one  of  the  there 
signs,  Mesha  (Aries^,  Simha  (Leo^and  Dhanus  (Sagittarius),  technically  known 
as  the  eastern  signs.  The  Sun  and  Mars  have  it  if  in  one  of  the  three  signs, 
Vrishaba  [Taurus],  Kenya  [Virgo],  Makara  capricornus  known  as  the  South- 
ern Signs.  Saturn  has  it  in  one  of  the  three  signs,  Mithuna  IGemini^y  Tula 
(L-f&ra)  Kumbha  (Jguanws)  known  as  the  western  signs.  Venus  and  the  Moon 
have  it  if  in  oneof  the  three  signs,  Katalca  [Caneer]  VrischiJca  [^Scorpioj  and 
Ileena  {Pisces)  known  as  the  northren  signs. 

X A planet  has  Stana  bala  if  he  is  in  his  own  sign,  in  a friendly  ‘sign,  in 
his  ucha  sign  or  in  his  own  navamsa  or  drekkana. 

§ The  moon,  Mars  and  Saturn  have  Kalabala  at  night.  Mercury  has  it  at 
all  times,  the  other  planets  during  the  day,  the  malefic  planets  in  the  waning 
moon  and  the  benefic  ones  in  the  waxing  moon.  A planet  has  sdso  Kalabala 
in  his  year,  month,  day  and  hour. 

^ The  sun  and  moon  have  cheshta  bala  when  in  one  of  the  six  signs  from 
Mahara;  the  other  planets  have  it  when  retrograde,  when  in  conjunction  with 
the  Moon,  or  when  in  their  greatest  brilliancy.  In  conjunctions  the  northers 
planets  have  it. 


Ch.  2] 


Bmhat  Samhita. 


7 


of  each ; the  caste,  sex  and  aathoihty  of  each  and  the  like; 
he  must  be  able  to  state,  from  the  time  of  conception  or  birth 
of  a person,  particulars  connected  with  these  occasions 
so  as  to  insure  belief  .;  he  must  be  able  to  say  in  what  cases  a 
child  will  die  in  infancy,  and  to  calculate  the  period  of  one’s  ex- 
istence; he  must  be  able  to  divide  one’s  life  into  planetary 
divisions  and  subdiyions  ; he  must  be  able  to  use  the  ashtaha- 

varga^  Tables  to  a given  horoscope.  He  mustknow  how  t 

^ * * * § 

the  several  Raja,  Chandra^  Vvigraha,  and  Nahhasa  yogas  affect 
the  fortunes  of  men.  He  must  also  know  how  the  fortunes  of 
men  are  affected  by  the  position  and  look  of  planets.  He  must 

be  able  to  calculate  the  cause  of  one’s  death  and  discover  his 
future  life. 

He  must  be  able  to  discover  auspicious  periods  for  marriages 
and  the  like. 

In  yatra  { he  must  know  the  fitness  or  unfitness  of  a titJii 
[lunar  day],  vara  [week  day],  Karana,  NatcJiatra,  Muhoorta,  and 
lagna  [a  sign  of  zodiac]  and  yoga  for  particular  purposes.  He 
must  be  able  to  interpret  natural  gestures  and  dreams;  § he 
must  be  able  to  state  when  a prince  ought  to  start  lor  battle 
to  secure  succees  in  vvar ; he  must  be  learned  in  rules  relating 
to  ablutions  and  sacred  fire  ceremonies  in  honor  of  the  planets 
and  offerings  to  evil  spirits;  he  must  be  able  to  interpret  pheno- 
mena connected  with  such  sacred  fires  and  with  elephants  and 
horses  while  mounting  the  same. 

He  must  be  able  to  interpret  the  language  and  gestures  of 


* The  object  is  to  discover  from  the  positions  of  the  planets  in  one’s 
nativety  how  the  planets  affect  one’s  fortunes  as  they  pass  through  the  several 
zodiacal  signs. 

f These  are  particular  positions  of  the  plan«ts. 

t This  literally  means  journey — evidently  royal  marches  and  forms  a 
lection  of  horoscopy. 

§ To  ascertain  the  King’s  fortunes  in  war,  the  practice  was  to  direct  the 
minister,  the  astrologer  & the  priest  to  sleep  in  the  Temple  and  then  to  interpret 
their  dreams. 


8 


Brihat  Samhita. 


[Ch.  2. 


fighting  men  and  the  like;  he  must  be  learned  in  the  Shadguna^ 
and  iipayaf  policies;  he  must  be  able  to  predict  the  success  or 
failure  of  an  undertaking;  he  must  be  able  to  interpret  omens; 
he  must  have  a knowledge  of  favourable  halting  places  for  the 
King’s  army;  he  must  be  able  to  interpret  the  color  of  cere- 
monial fires;  he  must  know  when  to  employ  the  minister^ 
spies,  messengers  and  forest  men;  he  must  be  able  to  give  di- 
rections touching  the  capture  of  the  enemy’s  fortress. 

On  all  the  above  subjects,  works  of  learned  men  exist- 
The  predictions  of  one  to  whom  the  truths  of  the  science  appear 
as  if  spread  before  his  eyes,  written  on  his  mind  and  planted  in 
his  breast  will  never  fail. 

A true  Astrologer  is  also  one  who  has  thoroughly  mastered 
the  Science  of  Samhita. 

* 

It  treats  J of  the  motions  of  the  sun  and  planets;  of  their 
size,  color,  rays,  biulliancy  and  shape  and  changes  in  the  sam  e 
of  their  disappearance  and  reappearance;  of  their  courses  and 
deviations  therefrom;  of  their  retrograde  and  re-retrograde 
motions;  of  their  conjunction  with  the  stars  and  of  their  places 
among  the  stars  and  the  like. 

It  treats  of  the  effects  of  agastya  chara^  and  saptarishi 
chara  ^ on  particular  parts  of  India,  corresponding  to  parti- 
cular portions  of  the  ecliptic;  of  the  stellar  divisions  of  every 
substance,  animal  and  plant,  and  of  their  increase  or  decrease 
according  to  the  motion  of  the  planets  among  the  stars;  of 
the  formation  and  interpretation  of  various  figures  presented 

* These  are  six— 1. Sandhi  or  reconciliation  with  the  enemy.  2 Vigraha  or 
open  battle.  3 Yana  or  proceeding  to  battle  or  other  strategic  movement  4.  Amna 
or  stopping  in  the  capital  5 Bvayidham  or  of  two  enemies  to  join  one  with  a 
view  to  defeat  the  other  6.  Asrya  or  submission. 

t These  are  four  1.  Sarna  or  reasoning  with.  2.  Dana  or  gift.  3.  Bheda 
or  bringing  about  dissension  among  the  enemies.  4.  Denda  or  punishment. 

t The  following  is  by  no  means  an  exhaustive  list  of  the  subjects 
treated  of. 

§ Heliacal  rising  of  canopus. 

IF  Heliacal  rising  of  the  Bear.  * * * § 


Ch.  2] 


Brihat  Samhita. 


9 


by  the  planets  when  raeeting  together;  of  planetary  conjunc- 
tions; of  planetary  years*,  of  inonsoonish  indications  of  the 
weather;  of  the  moon^s  conjunction  with  Rohini  (4th  constel- 
lation)^ ( 1 5th  constellation)  and  tile  tw  ) asliridris  (20th 

and  21st  constellations^  on  particular  weekdays  of  the  month  of 
Ashada  and  of  proKlicting  the  niture  of  the  coming  weather 
and  crops  from  the  same. 

It  treats  of  the  prediction  of  immediate  rain  from  sur- 
rounding phenomena;  of  judging  the  nature  of  the  future  crops 
from  the  growth  of  plants  and  flowers;  of  the  halos  round  the 
sun  and  moon;  of 'lines  of  clouds  crossing  the  sol  ir  discat 
rising  and  setting;  of  the  winds;  of  meteoric  falls;  of  false  fires; 
of  earthquakes;  of  the  red  sky  immediately  before  sunrise  and 
after  sunset ; of  the  fanciful  shapes  of  clouds  ; of  dust  storms; 
of  thunderbolts;  of  the  price  of  food  grains;  of  gardening. 

It  treats  of  indradlwcija,  * of  the  rainbow  and  of  architect- 
ure; of  the  prediction  of  events  from  casual  words  and  ges- 
tures and  from  the  cawing  of  crows;  of  the  formation  of  Zodia- 
cal circles  for  purposes  of  horary  astrology. 

It  treats  of  the  prediction  of  future  events  from  phenomena 
connected  with  the  deer^  the  dog  and  the  motions  of  the  wind; 
of  tbe  construction  of  temples,  towers  and  palaces;  of  the  casting 
of  images  and  of  founding  the  same;  of  the  growth  of  plants 
and  trees;  of  under  currents;  of  certain  annual  ceremonies  to 
be  performed  by  princes  for  success  in  war. 

It  also  treats  of  the  prediction  of  events  from  the  flight  of  the 
kanjana{8i  small  black  bird-the  gracular  religiosa)  and  from  the 
appearnce  of  various  abnormal  phenomena^  of  expiatory  cerem- 
onies; of  miscellaneous  planetary  nhenomeua;  of  ghrita  kamhala;f 
or  the  royal  sword  ; of  patta;  { of  the  features  of  a house 

* This  refers  to  the  erection  of  a flag  staff  on  ocoasiens  of  Cf.rtain  an- 
nual ceremonies  performed  by  princes. 

f . A certain  ceremony  of  ablation  on  the  occasion  of  a sovereign’s 

coronation 

•f  • 


A gold  ornament  for  the  forehead. 


Brihat  Samhita. 


10 


[Ch.  2 


cock,  a cow,  a sheep,  ahorse,  an  elephant,  a man  and  a woman. 

It  also  treats  of  the  treatment  of  women;  of  moles  in  the 
body;  of  injuries  to  shoes  and  clothes;  of  hairy  fans;  of  walking 
sticks.;  of  beds  and  seats;  of  lamplight;  of  tooth  brush  and  the 
like. 

Generally,  the  determination  of  the  fortunes  of  men  and 
princes  depends  on  matters  enumerated  above  and  changing 
every  moment.  It  therefore  behoves  a prince  to  employ  as- 
trologers solely  upon  this  work,  As  it  is  impossible  for  a 
single  astrologer  to  observe  and  determine  all  the  phenomena 
occurring  day  and  night,  the  task  must  be  assigned  to 
four  competent  and  well  paid  astrologers;  one  of  them  is  to 
observe  the  east  and  south-east;  another  the  south  and  south- 
west; a third  the  west  and  north-west;  and  the  fourth  the  north 
and  north-east.  For  the  fall  of  meteors  and  the  like  is  sudden 
in  its  nature  and  the  determination  of  one’s  fortunes  depends 
on  the  shape,  color,  gloss,  size  and  the  like  of  these  falling 
b odies  and  upon  how  they  approach  or  cross  planets  and  stars. 

And  Bhagavan  Garga  says:« — 

7.  That  prince  meets  with  ruin  who  does  nob  support  a 
Jyoutishaka  well  versed  in  all  the  Divisions  and  Subdivisions 
of  Samhita  and  in  Horoscopy  and  Astronomy, 

8.  Even  men  who,  having  conquered  their  passions 
and  cut  asunder  all  ties  of  family,  live  in  woods,  desire  to  ques- 
tion a learned  Jyoutishaka  regarding  their  future. 

9.  As  is  the  night  withou*]  a lamp  and  the  sky  without  the 
sun,  so  is  a prince  without  a Jyoutishaka  and  he  gropes  his 
way  in  the  dark. 

10.  If  there  were  no  Jyoubishakas,  the  muhurtasy  the 
iitheeSj  the  nakshatras,  the  ruthus  and  the  ayanas  would  go 
wrong. 

11.  It  therefore  behoves  a prince  who  loves  succass,  fame, 


Brihat  Samhita. 


11 


Ch.  2] 


wealth,  happiness  and  renown  to  secure  the  services  of  a 
learned  Jyoutishaka. 

1 2.  He  who  loves  prosperity  ought  not  to  live  in  a country 
devoid  of  a Jyoutishaka.  He  (the  Jyoutishaka)  forms  as  it  were 
the  eye  of  the  land  and  where  he  dwells,  sins  exist  not, 

1 3.  A learned  Jyoutishaka  not  only  escapes  hell  but  (after 
death)  goes  to  the  Brahma  loka  and  obtains  salvation. 

3 4.  That  Brahmin  Jyoutishaka  who  has  mastered  both  the 
texc  and  the  purport  of  the  entire  science  deserves  to  be  res- 
pected and  fed  first  on  occasions  of  Sradha  and  he  purifies 
the  party  of  diners. 

15.  Even  the  Mlechas  and  the  Yavanas  (Greeks)  who 
have  well  studied  the  science  are  respected  as  Rishis.  Such 
being  the  case,  if  the  Jyoutishaka  should  happen  to  be  a 
Brahmin,  who  will  deny  him  respect? 

1 6.  A pretentious  Jyoutishaka  whose  knowledge  of  the 
science  has  been  picked  up  from  what  has  occasionally  fallen 
on  his  ears  ought  not  to  be  consulted. 

17.  He  who,  not  having  studied  the  science,  passes  for  a 
Jyoutishaka  is  a sinner  and  a disgrace  to  society. 

18.  He  who  ridicules  the  words  of  a Jyoutishaka,  as 
well  as  the  person  who  sneers  at  the  science  itself,  will  suffer 
miseries  in  the  hell  of  darkness. 


19.  To  question  an  ignorant  man  is  not  unlike  begging 
of  a clod  of  earth  at  the  gate  of  a city  for  a gift:  whatever  is 
truth  will  finally  triumph. 

20.  One  that,  after  the  occurrence  of  an  event,  pretends 
that  his  prediction  already  meant  so  much,  and  one  that 
wanders  away  from  the  subject  as  well  as  the  person  who  is 
proud,  having  only  an  imperfect  knowledge  of  the  subject  shall 
be  rejected  by  a prince. 

21*  He  who  well  knows  the  hora,  the  ganita  and  the 


Beihat  Samhita. 


12 


[Ch.  2 


Samhita  shastras  ought  to  be  respected  by  the  prince  wbo  loves 
victory  and  admitted  into  his  court. 

22.  Th?tt  service^  which  a single  Jyoutisahaka,  having  a 
knowledge  of  place  and  time  can  render  to  a prince^  cannot 
be  rendered  to  him  by  a thousand  elephants  or  by  four  thou- 
sand horses. 

23.  The  evils  of  bad  dreams,  of  sad  thoughts,  of  ill 
emtns  and  of  evil  deeds  and  the  like  will  vanish  immediately 

* one  hears  of  the  moon’s  motion  among  tbe  stars. 


24.  Neither  the  father  nor  the  mother  nor  the  relations 
nor  friends  of  a prince  will  desire  so  much  his  well  being  and 
that  of  his  subjects  as  a true  Jyoutisahaka. 


CHAPTER  HI. 

* 

On  the  Sun. 

1 . At  one  time,  the  Sun’s  southward  course  commenced 
on  his  reaching  the  middle  of  Aslesha  {the  ninth  constellation) 
and  its  northward  course  on  its  reaching  the  beginning  of  Dha- 
nishta  (the  twenty-third  constellation,  the  Delphin  of  Europe- 
an 2\st]  onomersk  This  must  have  been  the  case  as  we  find  it 
so  recorded  in  ancient  books. 

2.  Whereas  at  present  the  one  course  of  the  sun  commen- 
ces at  the  beginning  of  Cancer^  and  the  other  at  the  beginning 

of  Capricorrus.  That  it  is  so,  and  different  from  what  it  was 
at  one  time  can  easily  be  ascertained  from  actual  observat’on 
as  follows: 

3.  Either  from  observing  some  distant  point  in  the  hori- 
aon  where  the  sun  rises  or  sets  or  from  observing  the  ingress 

o n 

or  the  egress  of  the  end  of  shadow  of  a perpendicular  rod 
placed  at  the  centre  of  a big  horizontal  circle  (the  change  in 
the  sun^s  course  can  be  detected.) 

4.  It  the  Sun  should  change  his  course  before  reaching 


Ch.  3] 


Brihat  Samhita. 


13 


Malmra  [Capricornus)  he  will  bring  evil  on  the  west  and  south  • 
and  if  he  should  do  so  before  reaching  Katahci  iGancer"],  he 
will  bring  evil  on  the  north  and  east. 

5.  d'he  Snn  when  he  changes  his  course  from  north  to 
south  and  when  in  his  usu  il  con  lition  will  bring  on  prosperity 
and  increase  of  crops;  bat  when  he  undergoes  a change  either 
in  his  usual  course  or  in  his  usual  appearance  * he  causes 
fear  to  mankind.  . 

6.  Even  on  other  than  new-moon  days  the  Kethu  named 
Tvashta  eclipses  the,  solar  disc-  Then  seven  princes  and  their 
subjects  will  perish  by  the  sword^  by  fire  and  by  famine. 

7.  The  dark  spots^  also  known  as  Kethus^  the  S' ns  of  Rahu 
are  Thamasa,  Keelaha  and  the  like^  and  are  33  in  number.  How 
they  affect  the  earth  depends  upon  their  color,  position  and 
shape. 

8.  If  these  spots  should  appear  on  the  solar  disc,  man- 
kind will  suffer  miseries;  if  on  the  lunar  disc  mankind  will  be 
happy;  bat  if  they  take  the  shape  of  a crow,  a headless  human 
body,  or  a weapon,  mankind  will  suffer  even  though  the -spots 
should  appear  on  the  moon. 

9.  When  the  spots  appear  on  the  solar  disc  the  waters 
will  get  disturbed;  the  sky  will  be  filled  with  dust;  high  winds 
capable  of  breaking  down  the  tops  of  mountains  and  of  trees^ 
will  carry  pebbles  and  sand  along  their  course. 

10.  The  trees  will  fail  to  yield  in  their  appropriate  seasons 
birds  and  animals  will  appear  to  be  burning;  there  will  be  an 
appearance  -of  false  fire  all  round;  an!  lightning  and  earth- 
quake will  afflict  mankind. 

11.  If  there  should  appear  on  the  solar  disc  Kethnsf 
other  than  the  thirty-three  already  mentioned,  or  spots  pike- 
like in  shape  the  effects  of  these  and  of  solar  eclipses  are  the 


* The  recent  phenomenon  of  the  bine  orgreen  rayless  sun  is  an  instance, 
t This  term  in  applied  both  to  comets  and  to  solar  spots 


14  BEIHiT  Samhita.  [Ch.  ^ 

same  as  those  assigned  to  them  in  the  Chapters  [V  and  XI]  on 
Rahuchara  and  Kethuchara. 

12.  The  princes  of  the  countries  in  which  the  spots  am 
visible  will  be  afflicted  with  miseries. 

13.  Even  Rishis^  reduced  to  mere  skeletons  by  starvation, 
giving  up  their  pious  c mrse  of  lifej  with  fl^shless  infants  in 
their  armSj 

li.  .Deprived  of  their  property  by  highway  men,  with 
long  sighs,  closed  eyes^  emaciated  bodies,  and  with  their  sight 
dimmed  with  the  tears  of  sorrow  will  proceed  with  difflculty 
to  other  lauds. 

15.  Men,  reduoed  to  mere  bones  and  ashamod  to  beg 
will  be  harassed  both  by  their  own  princes  and  by  the  princes 
of  other  lands.  Some  will  begin  to  speak  disparagingly  of 
the  character  and  deeds  of  their  own  sovereign. 

16.  Even  though  there  should  be  indications  of  good 
rain,  the  clouds  will  yield  little  rain  ; the  rivers  will  fall  and 
[food]  crops  will  be  found  [only]  here  and  there. 

17.  If  the  spots  should  be  of  the  shape  of  a rod  the  prince 
dies;  if  of  the  shape  of  a headless  body  mankind  will  suffer 
from  disease;  if  of  the  shape  of  a crow  they  will  suffer  from 
robbers;  and  if  of  the  shape  of  a pike,  they  will  suffer  from 
famine. 

13.  If  the  solar  spots  should  be  of  the  shape  of  the  em* 
blems  of  royalty  such  as  Chatra  [umbrella],  Dhvaja  [flag  staff] 
and  Chamara  [hairy  fan]  and  the  like,  the  reigning  prince 
will  be  dethroned  and  a foreign  prince  will  begin  to  reign. 
It  the  spots  should  appear  like  sparks  of  fire,  like  the  smoke 
and  the  like,  his  subjects  will  suffer. 

19*  A single  spot  will  bring  on  famine;  if  two  or  more 
spots  should  appear,  the  reigning  prince  will  die;  if  they 
should  appear  white,  red,  yellow  or  black  then  the  Brahmins,, 
the  Kshatrias,  the  Vaisias  or  the  Sudras  will  suffer  respectivly. 


Ch.  3.] 


Brihat  Samhita, 


15 


20.  Only  those  parts  ot  the  earth  will  suffer  in  the  corres- 
ponding parts  of  which  on  the  solar  disc  the  spots  happen  to 
appear. 

21.  If,  when  the  rays  are  turned  away  from  the  earth 
the  color  of  the  sun  be  that  of  copper  the  commander-in-chief 
dies;  if  it  be  green  oi\yellow  the  king^s  son  dies;  if  it  be  white 
the  royal  chaplain  dies. 

22.  If  the  sun,  be  variegated  in  color  or  of  the  color  of 
smoke  there  will  be  either  i mmediate  rain  or  mankind  will 
suffer  from  robbers  and  from  weapons. 

23  If  in  Sisird  [Pebrurry,  March]  the  sun  be  of  copper 
color  or  red  black,  if,  in  Vasanta\^k^v\\j  May],  blue  crimson, 
if,  in  Greeshma  [June,  July],  slightly  white  and  of  gold  color, 
if,  in  Varsha  [Au  gust,  September],  white, 

24.  If,  in  [October,  November],  of  the  color  of  the 
centre  of  the  lotus,  if,  in  Hemanta  [December,  January],  of 
blood  color,  mankind  will  be  happy. 

If,  in  Varsha  [August,  September],  the  rays  of  the  sun  be 
soft,  mankind  will  be  happy  even  though  the  sun  should  be  of 
any  of  the  colors  mentioned  above. 

25.  If,  in  Varsha j when  the  rays  are  sharp,  the  sun  be 
white  then  the  Brahmins,  if  of  blood  color  the  Kshatrias,  if 
yellow  the  Vaisias,  and  if  black  the  Sudras  will  parish.  If, 
as  said  above,  the  rays  be  soft,  mankind  will  be  happy. 

26.  If,  in  Greeshma,  the  sun  be  of  blood  color  mankind  will 
be  afflicted  with  various  fears; 

If,  m-Varsha,  he  be  black  there  will  be  drouo-ht  on  the 

Earth; 

If,  in  Hemanta  he  be  yellow  there  will  be  immediate  fear 
from  disease. 

27.  If  the  solar  disc  should  be  crossed  by  the  rainbow  the 
princes  of  the  laud  will  be  at  vvar  with  one  another.  If  in 
winter  the  disc  be  clear  there  will  be  immediate  rain. 


16 


Brihat  Samhita. 


[Ch.  3. 


28.  If  in  Varsha  the  color  of  the  sun  be  that  of  the  flower 
Sireesha  (Mimosa  flexuosa)  there  will  be  immediate  rain  ; if 
the  color  be  that  of  the  peacock^s  plume  there  will  be  no 
rain  for  12  years  to  come. 

29.  If,  then  the  sun  be  black  there  will  be  fear  from  worms 
and  reptiles;  if  it  be  ashy  pale  there  will  be  fear  from  foreign 
princes;  if  the  sun  should  appear  with  a hole  that  prince  will 
peiish  in  the  star*of  whose  nativty  the  sun  then  happens  to  be. 

30.  If  at  other  times  than  rising  or  setting  the  sun  be  of 
the  color  of  the  blood  of  a hare  there  will  be  war  in  the  land; 
if  he  should  appear  like  the  moon,  the  reigning  prince  will 
be  killed  and  a foreign  prince  will  succeed  immediately. 

31.  If  the  sun  should  appear  like  a pot ; he  brings  on  hun- 
ger and  death;  if  he  should  appear  broken,  the  reigning  prince 
dies;  if  without  rays,  mankind  will  be  afflicted  with  feais;if 
like  a gate,  then  the  capital  city,  if  like  an  umbrella  then  the 
country,  will  perish. 

32.  If  the  sun  should  appear  like  a flag  staff,  or  a bow,  or 
quivering  or  of  sharp  rays  he  will  bring  on  wars;  if  there 
should  appear  black  lines  on  his  disc  the  reigning  prince  will 
die  by  the  hand  of  his  own  minister. 

33.  If,  at  rising,  t the  sun  should  be  crossed  by  the  fall 
of  an  aerolite,  or  thunderbolt,  or  by  ligh  tniug,  the  reigning 
prince  will  die  and  a foreign  prince  will  succeed. 

34.  If,  for  several  days,  there  should  appear  a halo  round 
the  sun  both  at  rising  and  setting  or  if  the  sun  should,  at  such 
periods,  be  of  blood  color,  the  reigning  sovereign  will  be  de- 
throned and  a foreign  prince  will  succeed. 

35.  If  at  rising  and  setting  the  sun  should  be  hid  by  clouds 
of  the  shape  of  implements  of  war,  he  will  bring  on  strife;  if 
these  clouds  should  appear  like  a deer,  a buffalo,  a bird,  an 

* The  star  of  a person  is  that  constellation  in  which  the  moon  is  at  the 
time  of  his  hirth. 

t Or  setting,  according  to  commentator  , 


Ch.  3]  Bkihat  Samhita.  17 

a^s  or  a young  camel;  mankind  will  be  afflicted  with  fears. 

36.  The  planetS;  when  subjected  to  the  hot  rays  of  the  sun 
are  freed  from  their  impurities  just  as  gold  is  purified  by  the 
action  of  the  fire- 

37.  If  the  halo  should  be  to  the  north  of  the  sun  there  will 
be  rain;  if  to  the  south  there  will  be  wind;  if  on  both  sides 
there  wil]  be  fear  from  floods;  if  above  the  sun  (towards  the 
meridian)  then  the  king,  if  below  it  (towards  the  horizon);  then 
his  subjects,  will  perish. 

38.  If  the  sun  should  be  of  blood  color  when  in  mid-heaven, 
or  if  he  should  appear  red  by  a dust  storm  the  reigning  prince 
will  die. 

f9.  If  the  sun  should  be  either  black  or  a mixture  of  black 
and  other  colors  and  if  birds  and  animals  should  fearfully  howl 
towards  night-fall,  mankind  will  perish. 

40.  If  the  solar  disc  should  be  of  clear  appearance  and 
not  irregular  in  shape  and  if  its  rays  be  pure,  Avide  and  far- 
reaching  and  if  the  disc  should  be  stainless  mankind  Avill  enjoy 
prosperity. 


CHAPTER  IV^. 

On  the  Moon. 

1.  The  Moon  is  always  below  (nearer  to  the  Earth  than) 
the  sun.  It  is  spherical  in  shape.  One  half  of  it  is  always 
illumined  by  the  light  of  the  sun,  while  the  other  half  is  dark 
owing  to  its  own  shadow,  just  like  a pot  placed  in  the  sun. 

2.  The  rays  of  the  sun  falling  on  the  watery  moon  remove 
the  darkness  of  the  night  (on  Earth)  just  in  the  same  way 
as  light  reflected  from  a mirror  (placed  in  the  sun)  removes 
the  darkness  (from)  within  a room. 

3.  The  moon  after  quitting  the  place  (direction^  of  the 


18  Brihat  Samhuta.  [Ch  4. 

gun  becomes  illumined  by  the  sun  from  below  and  she  then 
also  rises  after  the  sun. 

4.  Thus  the  lunar  disc  appears  more  and  more  illumined 
day  by  day  by  the  sun  according  to  her  change  of  place, 
just  in  the  same  way  as  the  western  half  of  a pot  becomes 
gradually  illumined  by  the  sun  in  the  after-noon. 

5.  If  the  moon  should  pass  to  the  south  of  JesJita^ 
(the  18th  constellation),  Mula  (the  19th  constellation)  and 
the  two  Ashadas  (20th  and  21st  constellations)  she  destroys 
seeds,  creatures  in  water  and  forests;  and  there  will  also  be 
tear  from  fire. 

6.  If  the  moon  should  pass  to  the  south  of  Visahha 
{the  16th  constellation)  and  Anuratha  (the  17th  constel- 
lation) she  will  bring  on  evil.  If  she  should  pass  through 
the  middle  of  Magha  (the  lObh  constellition)  or  of  Visahha 
(the  16th  constellation)  she  will  bring  on  prosperity. 

7.  In  the  six  lunar  mansions  beginning  from  Revati  (the 
27th)  the  stars  are  towards  the  east;  and  in  the  twelve  beginning 
fiom  Aidra  (the  6th)  they  are  in  the  centre;  and  in  the  nine 
beginning  ivomjeshta  (the  18th)  they  are  in  the  west  of  the 
several  mansions;  and  the  moon^s  conjunction  with  the  several 
lunar  mansions  is  said  to  take  place  when  the  mooa  is  in  the 
middle  of  these  mansions. 

8.  Iff  the  two  horns  of  the  moon  should  appear  but  slight- 
ly  raked  and  far  from  each  other  presenting  the  appearance  of 
a boat,  she  brings  trouble  on  the  sailors  but  prosperity  on  man- 
kind at  large. 

9.  If  the  northern  horn  of  the  moon  should  be  hio’her 

* Tlie  Moon  can  never  pass,  the  commentator  adds,  to  the  soiith  of  the 
four  stars  menticned  in  the  text  ordinarily  and  that  wherever  the  phenomena 
described  in  the  text  clash  with  astronomical  oalenlatioils  they  should  be 
treated  as  abnormal.  ' ' . : . 

t The  author  now  proceeds  to  state  certain  uuusual  appearances  of  the 
mooD. 


Ch.  4.] 


Brihit  Samhita. 


than  the  other  by  one-half^  the  moon  appearing*  like  a plougfh^ 
plough-men  will  then  suffer,  'rheyand  their  prince  will  be 
friendly  and  there  will  be  prosperity  in  the  laud. 

10.  If  the  southern  horn  should  be  higher  than  the  other 
by  one  half^  the  appearance  o^’the  moon  is  also  said  to  be  plough 
like  but  of  evil  consequences.  The  ruler  of  Southern  India 
will  die  and  his  army  will  engage  in  war. 

11.  If^  on  the  first  lunar  day  after  newmooii;.  both  horns 

should  be  alike  and  of  equal  height^  there  will  be  the  same  pro- 

¥ 

sperity  and  rain  throughout  the  month  as  on  such  first  lunar 
day.  If  the  moon  should  appear  like  a rod,  the  cattle  will  suffer 
and  the  sovereign  will  rule  with  a severe  rod. 

12.  If  the  moon  should  appear  like  a bow,  there  will  be 
war  in  the  laud;  and  those  will  succeed  whose  places  lie  in  the 
direction  of  the  bow-string*  If  the  moon  should  appear  stret. 
ched  from  North'  to  South  presenting  the  appearance  of  a car- 
riage pole  there  will  be  earthquake  (within  that  month). 

13.  If,  when  the  northern  horn  is  a little  higher  than  the 
other  and  bent  aside,  the  southern  horn  is  straight  like  a carri- 
age pole,  pilgrim  parties  will  suffer  and  there  will  be  no  rain. 

14.  If  one  of  the  horns  should  appear  higher  than  the 
other  and  bent  down  at  the  end,  cows  will  suffer. 

] 5.  If  the  horns  should  together  appear  like  a circle 
then  the  provincial  rulers  will  have  to  quit  their  places*. 

16.  If  the  northern  horn  should  bo  higher  than  the  south- 
ern one  otherwise  than  as  stated  already,  the  crops  will 
flourish  and  there  will  be  good  rain.  If  the  southern  horn 

* In  all  the  above  cases  the  observation  is  to  be  made  on  the  first  or  second 
lunar  day  and  these  unusual  phenomena  will  produce  evil  only  when  they  clash 
with  the  calculated  phases  of  the  moon  and  not  otherwise.  It  is  therefor© 
the  duty  of  almanac  publishers  to  give  beforehand  the  pha  a ea  of  the  moon 
f or  the  inform ation  of  the  public. 

The  author  now  proceeds  to  state  certain  ordinary  phenomena, 


20 


Beihat  Samhita. 


[Ch.  4, 


should  be  similarly  higher  there  will  be  famine  and  fear  in 
the  land. 

1 7,  If,  to  any  person  who  observes  on  the  first  lunar  day 
after  new-  moon,  the  moon  should  appear  of  only  one  horn,  or 
if  one  of  the  horns  should  appear  bent  downwards  or  if  she 
appear  like  a full  moon  (when  in  reality  such  is  not  the  case) 

the  person  dies*. 

18.  Having  thus  described  the  shape  of  the  moon  we 
next  proceed  to  describe  her  size  (generally):  if  the  moon 

should  appear  small  there  will  be  famine,  and  if  big,  prosperity, 

in  the  land. 

19.  If  the  middle  of  the  moon  should  appear  small,  there 
will  be  hunger  in  the  land  and  princes  will  be  afflicted  with 
cares.  If  the  middle  should  appear  big  she  will  cause  pros- 
perity and  plenty. 

# 

20.  H she  should  appear  broad,  she  will  increase  the 
prosperity  of  the  princes;  if  she  should  appear  big  there  will 

be  happiness  in  the  land,  and  if  small,  there  will  be  abundance 
of  that  grain  which  men  like  most. 

21.  If,  during  the  waxing  moon.  Mars  should  be  eclip- 
sed by  a horn,  the  border  (Mlecha)  princes  as  well  as  wicked 
rulers  will  suffer;  if  8aturn  should  be  so  eclipsed  there  will  be 
fear  from  weapons  and  from  hunger;  if  Mercury  should  be  so 
eclipsed  there  will  be  drought  and  famine  in  the  land;  if  Jupiter 
should  be  so  eclipsed  eminent  princes  will  suffer;  and  if  Venus, 
the  minor  princes  will  suffer.  As  regards  the  waning  moon 
the  subject  has  been  elsewhere  treated. 

22.  If  Venus  should  be  eclipsed  by  the  lunar  disc  the 
people  of  Magada,  the  Yavanas,  the  Mlechas,  men  of 

* This  evidently  refers  to  some  optical  illusion  consequent  on  the  disea- 
ses of  the  eye.  I know  of  an  old  gentleman  who  for  the  last  months 
sees  a double  sun  and  a double  moon.,^  It  follows  from;  this  that  some  at  least 
of  the  abnormal  appearances  of  the  snn  and  moon  may  not  inprobably  be  the 
result  of  optical  illusions  affecting  mankind  more  or  less. 


Beihat  Samhita. 


21 


Ch.  4.] 


Pulinda  (a  barbarous  tribe),  the  Nepaulees,  tbe  Bbriugees, 
aud  the  Marwarees,  the  men  of  Cutch  and  of  Surat,  the  Math- 
ras*,  the  Panchalas,  the  Kekayas,  the  Kuluthakas,  the  Can- 
nibals and  the  men  of  Usinara  (Candahar)  will  sutrer  mise- 
ries fcr  7 months. 

23.  If  Jupiter  should  be  eclipsed  by  the  lunar  disc  che 
men  of  Candahar,  of  Souveeraka,t  of  Sindh  and  of  Keera,  (Ca- 
shmere) the  rulers  of  the  Dravida  countries  and  Brahmins  as 
well  as  food  grains^and  mountains  will  suffer  for  ten  months^ 

24.  If  Mars  should  be  so  eclipsed  the  rulers  of  Trigartha 
(Lahore). and  of  Mfdwa,  with  their  fighting  men  in  their  cars, 
the  chiefs  of  Kulinda,  the  rulers  of  Sibee,  of  Oudh,  of  Kuru 
(Delhi),  of  Mathsia  and  of  Sukti  will  suffer  for  six  months. 

25.  If  Saturn  should  be  eclipsed  by  the  lunar  disc,  the 
ministers  of  Toudheya,  the  Kouravas,  the  Arjunas  as  well  as 
the  men  of  the  eastern  countries  will  suffer  miseries  for  ten 
months. 


26.  If  Mercury  should  be  so  eclipsed  the  men  of  Magada, 
of  Muttra  and  those  on  the  banks  of  the  river  Veena  will  suffer 
miseries  while  the  rest  of  the  land  will  enjoy  {he  happiness 
of  Krithayuga. 

27-  If  the  moon  should  be  eclipsed  by  KethuJ  she  will 
destroy  prosperty,  health  and  plenty.  Artisans  will  perish,  and 
thieves  will  suffer  greatly. 

28.  If  while  the  moon  is  eclipsed,  she  be  crossed  by  the 
fall  of  a meteor,  that  prince  will  die  in  the  star  of  whose  na- 
tivity the  moon  then  happens  to  be. 

29-  If  the  lunar  disc  be  of  ashy  color,  of  sharp  rays 
or  red,  or  rayless,  or  red  black,  or  appear  broken  there  will  be 
fear  of  hunger,  of  war,  of  disease  and  of  robbers.  ^ 

30.  If  the  lunar  disc  should  appear  white  and  of  the  color 
of  the  snow,  of  Kunda,  § of  Kumuda  ||  and  of  crystal 


* A country  to  the  North  West  of  Hindustan  Proper, 
f Probably  the  Suirs  inhabiting  the  Couotry  on  the  west  of  the  Indus. 

X This  refers  to  the  lunar  eclipse  when  the  moon  is  in  the  descending  node. 
§ A Species  of  white  flower. 

II  do  do 


22 


Brihat  Samhita. 


rCH.  4. 


he  brings  prosperity  on  the  land. 

31. '  If  the  disc  of  the  moon  that  regularly  waxes  and 
wanes  should  appear  white  resembling  the  color  of  the  kunda 
flower  or  thab  of  the  stem  of  the  lotus  or  if  the  moon's  course 
or  disc  or  rays  should  suffer  no  irregular  change  there  will  be 
prosperity  in  the  land. 

32,  During  the  waxing  moon  the  Brahmins,  the  Ksha 
trias  and  mankind  at  large  will  prosper;^  and  during  the  wa* 
ning  moon  they  will  suffer  miseries.  The  increase  of  pros- 
perity will  co  mmence  after  the  new-moon  and  of  adversity 
after  the  full  moon. 


CHiiPTEIl  V, 

On  Eahu.* 

Some  say  that  BahUj  the  asura,  though  his  head  was  cut, 
dies  not  but  lives  in  the  shape  of  a planet  having  tasted  of 
ambrosia. 

2.  That  he  has  a disc  like  the  sun  and  moon  and  as  that 
disc  is  black  it  is  invisible  when  in  the  sky  except  on  the 
occasion  of  eclipses  in  virtue  of  a boon  from  Brahma. 

V 

3.  Others  say  that  he  resembles  a serpent  in  shape 
with  his  head  severed  from  his  tail ; a few  that  he  is  bodiless^ 
that  he  is  mere  darkness  and  that  he  is  the  son  of  Simhika. 

4.  Now,  if  he  has  a body  or  be  simply  a head  with  a 
regular  motion  in  the  ecliptic,  how  comes  it  that  he  eclipses 
the  sun  and  moon  when  they  are  180°  from  him? 

5.  If  his  motion  be  not  subject  to  fixed  laws,  how  comes 
it  that  his  exact  place  is  ascertained ; how  comes  it  that  he 
never  eclipses  by  the  part  of  his  body  between  his  head  and 
tail. 

_ — 

* The  moon’s  node,  t-e,  one  of  the  two  points  where  the  moon’s  or  bit 
cots  the  ecliptic. 


Ch.  5.] 


Brihat  Samhita.  23 

6.  If  being  of  the  shape  of  a serpent  he  eclipses  Tvith 
his  head  or  with  his  tail,  how  comes  it  that  he  does  not  hide 

one  half  o£  the  heavens  lying  between  his  head  and  tail. 

7.  If,  as  some  say,  there  be  two  Rahns,  when  the  moon 

is  eclipsed  by  one  of  them  at  rising  or  setting  how  comes  it  we 
see  the  sun  in  the  opposite  point  uneclipsed  by  the  other  Rahu 
of  equal  motion  ? ‘ t 

8.  The  truth  is  that  in  her  own  eclipse,  the  moon  enters 
the  shadow  of  the 'earth,  and  in  that  of  the  sun,  the  solar 
disc.  Hence  the  lunar  eclipse  does  not  commence  at  the 
western  limb  nor  the"  solar  at  the  eastern  limb. 

y.  Just  as  the  shadow  of  a tree  neither  continues  in  the 
same  direction  nor  of  the  same  length,  so  changes  the  shadow 
of  the  earth,  night  after  night  owing  to  the  revolution  of  the 
sun* 

10.  When  the  moon,  whose  course  is  always  from  west  to 
east,  is  due  opposite  to  the  sun  swerving  neither  much  to  the 
north  nor  to  the  south,  she  enters  the  shadow  of  the  earth, 

11.  The  moon,  moving  from  the  west,  hides  the  solar 
disc  from  below  just  like  a cloud  ; and  the  solar  eclipse  varies 
differently  in  different  countries  according  to  the  different 
degrees  of  visibility  of  the  eclipsed  disc. 

12.  What  eclipses  the  moon  is  bigger  than  the  moon  ; 
what  eclipses  the  sun  is  smaller  than  the  sun.  Hence  in 
semi-lunar  and  semi-solar  eclipses  the  luminous  horns  are 
respectively  blunt  and  sharp. 

• I 

13.  Thus  the  causes  of  the  eclipses  have  been  stated  by 

learned  astronomers  ; that  R ihu  does  not  cause  the  eclipses 
is  the  truth  of  the  shastras.-  • * ' 

14.  '‘'May  you  be  satisfied  by  the  gifts  and  fire  offerings 
(of  men)  on  the  occasion  of  the  eclipses^^  us  the  boon  bestowed 
on  Rahu  by  the  command  of  Brahama. 


24 


Brihat  Samhita. 


[Ch.  5. 


lo.  On  the  occasion  of  the  eclipses,  Rahu^s  presence  is 
recognized  and  he  is  worshipped;  and  the  moon’s  ascending 
node  is  termed  Rahu  and  her  coarse  (north  or  south)  is  ascer- 
tained astronomically  with  respect  to  such  node. 

16.  It  IS  impossible  to  determine  eclipses  by  other  means 
than  those  described  above  ; even  on  other  than  new  or  full 
moon  days,  the  luminaries  may  be  eclipsed  abnormally — by 
comets  and  the  like. 

17.  It  is  wrong  to  say  that  there  can  be  no  eclipse  unless 
five  planets  are  in  conjunction  and  it  is  equally  wrong 
suppose  that  on  the  previous  Ashtamy  (Eighth  lunar)  day  the 
coming  eclipse  and  its  properties  can  be  ascertained  by 
examining  the  appearance  of  a drop  ot  oil  on  the  surface  of 
water. 

18.  The  magnitude  of  the  solar  eclipse  is  determined  by 
means  of  the  moon’s  parallax  (in  latitude);  the  points  (on  the 
disc)  ot  the  commencement  and  termination  of  the  eclipse  are 
determined  by  means  of  both  parallax  and  angles*;  the 
times  of  the  commencement  and  termination  of  the  eclipse  by 
means  of  the  time  of  ne  vv  moon.  The  details  of  the  process  of 
calculation  are  given  by  me  in  my  work  on  Astronomy. 

19.  Commencing  from  the  time  of  creation,  Brahma  is 
the  lord  over  the  new  and  full  moon  periods  of  the  first  six 
months;  the  Moon  is  the  lord  over  those  of  the  second  six 
months;  Indra  over  those  of  the  third  six  months;  Kubera 
over  those  of  the  fourth  six  months;  Varuna  over  those  of 
the  fifth  six  months;  Agni  over  those  of  the  sixth  six  months 
and  Yama  over  those  of  the  seventh  six  months;  and  so  on — ■ 
the  cycle  being  repeated  over  and  over  again. 

20.  If  Brahma  should  be  lord  as  stated  above,  cows  and 
Brahmins  will  prosper ; there  will  be  health  and  happiness  in 

✓ - - — ' — ^ 

* Teolmically  known  as  Akshavalauam  and  AjanaYalanam. 


Ch.  5.]  Brthat  Samhita.  2o 

the  land;  and  crops  will  thrive. 

If  the  moon  should  be  the  lord^  tlie  effects  will  be  those 
described  above;  also,  learned  men  will  suffer  and  there  will  be 
drought. 

21 . If  Indra  should  be  the  lord , the  princes  will  be  at  war 
with  each  other,  the  crops  of  Sarat  (October  and  November), 
will  perish  and  there  will  be  no  prosperity  in^e  land. 

If  Kubera  should  be  the  lord,  rich  men  will  suffer  in  their 
wealth  but  there  will  be  prosperity  in  the  land. 

22.  If  Yaruna,  should  be  the  lord,  princes  will  suffer  ; 

t i 

the  rest  will  be  happy  and  crops  will  flourish. 

3f  Agni  should  be  the  lord,  there  will  be  good  crops,  and 
there  will  also  be  health,  freedom  from  fear  and  abundance  of 
water. 

23.  If  Yama  should  be  the  lord,  ch^>re  will  be  drought, 
famine,  and  total  blight  of  crops;  in  the  next  parva  mankind 
will  be  afflicted  with  misery,  hunger,  dea  n and  drought. 

24.  If  the  eclipses  should  occur  before  the  calculated 
times,  there  will  be  miscarriage  of  preg  ancy  and  wars  in  the 
land;  if  they  should  occur  after  the  c louiated  times,  flowers 
and  fruits  will  perish  and  there  will  be  f'dv  in  the  land  and 
blight  of  crops.* 

25.  I have  described,  as  above,  effects  of  the  occur- 
rence of  eclipses  either  before  or  afre:’  tue  calculated  times 
in  accordance  with  the  ancient  shastr'^  r ^mt  the  calculation 
of  a really  learned  Astronomer  will  a l time  fail. 

26.  If  there  should  be  both  luu  . ”,d  solar  eclipses  in 

one  month,  t princes  will  snfff^»’  ^ from  dissensions 
among  their  own  army  and  from  wa  s. 

*The  commentator  is  of  opinion  that  the -u)  i/  ;:  ’lar  phenomena  must  be 
utpata  (abnormal^  in  their  nature. 

f This  is  taken  to  mean  the  thirteenth  or  " ite  n alary  lunar  month  in  the 
opinion  of  Vyasa  who  in  his  Mahabarat  (Bhi  liu:.  -ya)  refers  to  the  actual 
occurrence  of  such  eclipses  in  an  intercalary  o;:;,  v'len  dissuading  Duryoda- 
na  from  engaging  in  war;  and  Garga  is  also  th-'  i ^ opinion. 


26 


Beihat  Samhita. 


[Ch.  5, 


27  If  tlie  eclipse  should  occur  at  rising  or  setting,  the  crops 
of  Sarat  (October  and  November)  will  perish  and  princes  will 
suflfer.  In  total  eclipses  if  the  eclipsed  sun  or  moon  should 
be  subject  to  malefic  planetary  influence  there  will  be  death 
and  famine  in  the  land. 

28.  If  the  sun  and  moon  should  begin  to  be  eclipsed 
when  only  half  risen,  deceitful  men  will  suffer  as  well  as 
sacrificial  rites.  If  they  should  be  eclipsed  when  in  the  first 
section  * of  the  firmament,  those  that  live  by  fire  and  virtuous 
Brahmins  will  suffer  as  well  as  men  belonging  to  one  of  the 
holy  orders. 

29.  If  they  should  be  eclipsed  when  in  the  secon I sec- 
tion of  the  firmament,  ryots,  heretics,  merchants,  the 
Kshatriyas  and  commanders  of  the  army  will  suffer.  If 
when  in  the  third  section,  artisans,  the  Sudras,  the  Mlechas 
and  ministers  will  suffer. 

80.  If  when  in  mid-heaven,  the  central  provinces  will 
suffer,  but  there  will  be  happiness  over  the  land  and  the 
price  of  food  grains  will  fall.  If  when  in  the  fifth  section, 
herbivorous  animals,  ministers  and  house  h3ld  inmates  will 
suffer  as  also  the  Vysias. 

31.  If  they  should  be  eclipsed  when  in  the  sixth  sec- 
tion of  the  firmament,  women  and  the  Sudras  will  suffer ; if 
when  setting,  robbers  and  the  border  Mlechas  will  perish. 
Those  will  be  happy  in  whose  section  the  eclipse  terminates,  t 

32.  If  the  sun  and  moon  should  be  eclipsed  when  in 
their  iittara  ay  ana  (northward  march),  the  Brahmins  and 
^he  Kshtriyas  will  suffer;  if  when  in  th.Q\v  dahshina  ayana 
(southward  march)  the  Vysias  and  the  Sudras  will  suffer. 

If  the  eclipse  should  commence  at  the  northern,  eastern, 

* Out  of  the  six  sections  of  the  visible  hemispherical  vault  . 

f The  ccmmentator  adds  that  if  an  eclipse  should  both  commence  and 
terminate  in  one  and  the  same  section  there  will  be  both  suffering  first  and 
happiness  nest. 


Ch.  5.] 


Beihat  Samhita. 


27 


southerD^  or  western  point  of  the  disc,  the  Brahmins,  the 
Kshatriyas,  the  Vysias  or  the  Sudras  will  suffer  respectively' 

33.  If  the  disc  should  be  eclipsed  at  one  of  the  corners,* 
the  Mlechas,  persons  proceeding  to  battle  and  those  who 
]ive  by  fire  t will  perish ; if  the  southern  limb  should  be 
eclipsed  aquatic  creatures  as  well  as  elephants  will  die  ; and 
If  the  northern  limb  should  be  eclipsed  cows  will  suffer. 

34.  If  the  eastern  limb  should  be  eclipsed  there  will  be 
abundant  rain;  If  the  western  limb  should  be  eclipsed,  farmers 
and  servants  will  suffer  and  seed  grains  will  be  destroyed. 

t f 

35.  If  the  sun'and  moon  should  be  eclipsed  when  in  the 
sign  of  Aries  (Mesha),  J the  Panchalas,  the  Kalingas,  § the 
Surasenas,  the  people  ofComboja,  If  of  Odhra  ||  of  Kirata$ 
soldiers  and  persons  who  live  by  fire  will  be  afflicted  with  mis- 
eries. 

36.  If  the  sun  or  moon  should  be  eclipsed  when  in  the 
sign  of  Taurus  (Vrishabha),  shepherds,  cows,  their  owners 
and  eminent  men  will  suffer  miseries. 

37.  If  they  should  be  eclipsed  when  in  the  sign  of 
Gemini  (Mithuna),  chaste  women,  princes,  powerful  petty 
chiefs^  learned  men,  people  living  on  the  banks  of  the  J umna 
and  the  rulers  of  Balhika  and  Matsia  with  their  subjects  will 
suffer  miseries. 

38.  If  they  should  be  eclipsed  when  in  the  sign  of 
Cancer  (Kataka)  the  Abheeras,  the  Sabaras,  * * the  Palhavas, 

^ N.  E,  S.  E.  S.  W,  or  N.  W. 
t e g.  SmitJ^s,  potters  and  the  like. 

J Gf  the  fixed  Hindu  Zodiac. 

§ Kalinga ; a district  on  the  Coromandal  coast  extending  from  below  Cuttack 
to  the  vicinity  of  Madras. 

^ Camboja  ; probably  the  Combodia  of  Cochin  China. 

jj  Odhara  ; the  nothern  part  of  Orissa. 

$ Kirata  : a degraded  mountain  tribe, 

* * fiabarae : a wild  mountain  tribe. 


28 


Bkihat  Samhita. 


[Ch.  5^ 


theMallahs,  the  Matsias,  the  Kurus,*  the  Sakas,  f th©  Pan- 
chalas  and  the  VikalasJ  will  be  afflicted  with  miseries  and 
food  grains  will  be  destroyed. 

39.  If  the  sun  and  mooa  should  be  eclipsed  when  in 
the  sign  of  Leo  (Simha)  hill  men,  prince  like  people  possessed 
of  a single  military  force,  ^ princes  and  forest  men  will  suffer 
miseries.  If  they  should  be  eclipsed  when  in  the  sign  of 
Virgo  (Kanya),  crops^  poets,  writers  and  singers  will  suffer 
and  the  rice  fields  of  Asmaka,  and  Tripura  ||  will  be  destroyed. 

40.  If  they  should  be  eclipsed  when  in  the  sign  of 
Libra  (Tula),  the  people  of  the  extreme  border  lands  on  the 
West,  the  people  of  Sind,  the  trading  classes,  and  the  people 
of  Broach  will  be  afflicted  with  miseries.  If  when  in  the  sign 
of  Scorpio  (Vrischika),  the  people  of  Udambara,  of  Mathra,$  of 
Chola  and  of  Youdheya  will  all  suffer  miseries  along  with 
soldiers  armed  with  poisoned  weapons, 

41.  If  they  should  be  eclipsed  when  in  the  sign  of  Sagit- 
tarns  (Dhanus),  mininsters,  fine  horses,  the  Videhas,  the  Mullas, 
the  Panchalas,  Physicians,  merchants  and  persons  skilled  in 
the  use  of  destructive  weapons  will  perish.  If  when  in  the 
sign  of  Capricornus  (Makara),  fishes,  the  families  of  ministers, 
the  chandalas,  skilled  magicians  and  physicians  and  old  soldiers 
will  perish. 

42.  If  they  should  be  eclipsed  when  in  the  sign  of 
Aquarius  (Kumbha),  hill  men,  men  of  western  countries, 
carriers,  robbefs,  shepherds,  serpents,  worthy  men,  lions, 
citizens  and  the  people  of  Barbara  will  perish.  If  when  in 

the  sign  of  Pisces  (Meena),  the  products  of  the  sea  beach 

"■  — — — — ^ — — - ■ 

* Kurns  : people  of  the  District  of  Delhi. 

f Sakas  ; probably  the  descendants  of  the  Tartars  and  Scythians  who  in. 
vaded  India. 

$ Vikalas  : a warrior  tribe. 

^ Single  military  force : Cavalry,  or  Infantry  or  the  like. 

It  Tripura;  The  modern  Tippera. 

I Mathra  ; a country  to  the  N.  W.  of  Bindustan. 


Ch.  5.] 


Brihat  Samhtta. 


29 


and  of  the  sea,  men  of  respectability,  and  of  learning  and 
persons  that  live  by  water  will  suffer.  * 

Also  those  provinces  will  be  affected  which  correspond 
to  particular  lunar  mansions  in  which  the  eclipses  happen  to 
occur,  as  will  be  explained  in  the  Chapter  (14)  on  Knrmaivi- 
bhaga. 

43.  Solar  and  Lunar  eclipses  are  oi  ten  kinds  and  they 
arc  technically  knoVn  as  1 Savya,  2 A'pasavya,  3 Lehana;,  4 
Grasanaj  5 Nirodha,  6 Avamardanaj  7 Arohaj  3 Agrhata^ 
9 Madhyatama,  10  .TamontyaA 

44.  If  the  eclipse  should  commence  on  the  left  side  of 
the  disc,  it  is  technically  known  as  Savyagrasa:  the  earth 
will  then  be  flooded  with  water  and  there  will  be  joy  and 
freedom  from  fear.  If  it  should  commence  on  the  right  side 
of  the  disc,  it  is  technically  known  as  Apasavyagrasa  : man- 
kind will  suffer  from  their  rulers  and  from  robbers. 

45.  If  the  solar  or  lunar  disc  should  be  just  dimmed  by 
darkness  all  round  which  disappears  immediately,  the  eclipse 
is  technically  known  as  Lehana  (licking)  Grrasa  : all  creatures 
will  be  happy  and  the  earth  will  be  flooded  with  water, 

46.  If  a third,  or  a fourth,  or  one  half  of  the  disc  should 
be  eclipsed,  it  is  technically  known  as  Grrasana  (seizing  with 
the  month)  grasa — partial  eclipse  : the  wealth  of  prosperous 
princes  will  suffer  diminution  and  prosperous  countries  will  bo 
afflicted  with  calamities. 

47.  If  the  eclipse  should,  commencing  at  the  edge,  travel 

— — — y 

* Such  a string  of  apparently  incoherent  ideas  might  appear  inexplicable 
to  persons  ignorant  of  Astrology  in  which  all  objects,  animate  and  inanimate 
are  divided  into  planetary,  stellar,  zodiacal  and  other  divisions. 

t These  terms  are  explained  in  the  subsequent  stanzas^  some  of  them  have 
T.o  English  equivalents. 


30 


Beihat  Samhita. 


[Ch.  6. 

inwards  and  remain  there  for  a time  of  the  shape  of  a dark 
bal]^  it  is  technically  known  as  Nirodha  (blocking  up)  grasa  s 
all  creatures  will  be  happy. 

48.  If  the  eclipse  should  be  a total  one  and  continue  so 
for  a timC;  it  is  known  as  Avamardana  (tormenting)  grasa  : the 
then  chief  provinces  will  suffer  and  the  then  chief  rulers  will 
be  afflicted  with  miseries. 

49.  If  immediately  after  the  termination  of  the  eclipse^ 
the  disc  should  be  re-eclipsed  * (by  comets  and  the  like),  it  is 
technically  known  as  Arohana  (climbing)  grasa  : the  princes 
will  be  at  war  and  there  will  be  fear  in  the  land. 

50.  If  a small  portion  of  the  disc  should  be  so  slightly 
eclipsed  as  to  resemble  a mirror  covered  with  the  vapor  oi 
hot  breath,  the  eclipse  is  known  as  Aghrata  (smellingl  grasa  : 
there  will  be  good  rain  in  the  land. 

51.  If  the  middle  of  the  eclipsed  disc  should  be  dark 
while  the  disc  continues  bright  all  round,  the  eclipse  is  known 
as  Madhyatama  (centrally  dark)  grasa — annular  eclipse  : the 
Central  Provincesf  will  be  afflicted  with  miseries,  mankind  .will 
suffer  from  stomach  pain  and  there  will  be  fear  in  the  land. 

52.  If  all  round  the  disc,  the  darkness  be  thick,  and  in 
the  middle,  it  be  slight,  the  eclipse  is  technically  known  as 
Antyatama  (terminally  dark)  grasa  : the  crops  will  be  injuredj 

and  mankind  will  suffer  from  robbers. 

♦ 

53.  If  the  eclipsed  disc  should  appear  white,  there  will 
be  prosperity  and  plenty  in  the  land,  but  the  Brahmins  will 
suffer ; persons  who  live  by  fire  will  be  afflicted  with  miseries. 

54.  If  the  disc  should  appear  yellow,  there  will  be  increase 
of  disease  in  the  land  and  crops  will  suffer.  If  the  disc  should 

* This,  the  commentator  adds,  must  be  abnormal. 

f According  to  Man u the  country  to  the  east  of  Yinasana  : (the  modern 
Paniput)  io  the  west  of  Allahabad,  to  the  north  of  the  Yindya  mountains  and 
to  the  South  of  the  Himalayas. 

J These  injuries,  known  as  Eeti  badha,  are  six  .•  excessive  rain,  drought, 
rats,  grass  hoppers,  birds,  foreign  invasion. 


Brihat  Samhita. 


Ch.  5] 


31 


appear  of  gold  color^  swift  footed  animals  and  the  Mlechaa 
will  suffer  aud  there  will  be  famine  in  the  land. 

55.  If  the  disc  should  be  of  the  color  of  the  sky  at 
dawn  of  day_,  there  will  be  famine  and  drought  and  birds  will 
suffer.  If  red-black/ there  will  be  prosperity  and  plenty  in 
the  land  but  slight  rain. 

56.  If  the  disc  be  of  the  color  of  the  pigeon  or  of  blood 
color  or  of  the  color  of  gold  or  yellow-black,  mankind  will  suffer 
from  starvation.  If  ao^ain  the  disc  be  black  or  as  said  above, 
of  the  color  of  the  pigeon,  the  Sudras  will  suffer  from  disease, 

57.  If  the  eclipsed  disc  should  appear  yellow  resembling 
the  topaz  in  color,  the  Vysias  will  perish  and  there  will  be 
prosperity  in  the  land.  If  the  disc  should  appear  to  be  bur- 
ning, there  will  be  fear  from  fire ; if  it  should  resemble  gold 
ore,  there  will  be  wars  in  the  land. 

58.  If  the  disc  should  appear  black  resembling  the  color 
of  the  stem  of  durva  grass  (agrostis  linearis)  or  yellow,  there 
will  be  much  death  in  the  land.  If  of  the  color  of  the  flower 
patali  (Bignonia  Suaveolenis) — trumpet  flower— there  will 
be  fear  from  lightning. 

59.  If  the  eclipsed  disc  be  of  the  color  of  red  dust,  the 
Kshtriyas  will  suffer  and  there  will  be  no  rain.  If  of  the  color 
of  the  rising  sun,  of  lotus,  of  the  rainbow,  there  will  be  suffer- 
ing from  weapons. 

60.  If  Mercury  should  see  the  eclipsed  disc,  honey  and 
oil  will  become  scarce;  princes  will  suffer.  If  Mars  should 
see  the  eclipsed  disc  there  will  be  war  in  the  land  and  fear 
from  fire  and  robbers. 


61.  If  Venus  should  see  the  eclipsed  disc,  crops  will  be 
injured  and  mankind  will  be  variously  afilicted.  If  Saturn 
should  see  it,  there  will  be  drought  and  famine  in  the  land 
and  fear  from  robbers. 

62.  These  evil  effects,  resulting  from  planetary  look  at 


32 


Brihat  Samhita. 


[Ch.  5. 


tlie  eclipsed  disc^  apply  as  well  to  the  time  of  termination  of 
the  eclipse  as  to  its  commencement.  If  Jupiter a beneficent 
planet,  should  also  see  the  eclipsed  disc,  the  evils  described 
will  vanish  in  just  the  same  way  as  the  flame  of  fire  dies  out 
when  water  is  poured  over  it. 

63.  If  during  the  eclipse,  there  should  occur  tempests, 
meteoric  falls,  dust  storms,  earth  quakes,  universal  darkness, 
or  thunder  bolt,  the  eclipse  will  re-occur  after  six,  twelve, 
eighteen,  twenty -four,  thirty,  or  thirty-six  months  respec- 

64.  If  Mars  should  be  eclipsed  by  Eahu,  * the  people 
o£  Avanti,  those  living  on  the  bar.ks  of  the  Cavery  and  the 

Nerbada  and  haughty  princes  will  be  afflicted  with  miseries. 

65.  If  Mercury  should  be  so  eclipsed,  men  living  between 
the  Ganges  and  the  Jumna,  on  the  banks  of  the  Sarayu  and  in 
the  country  of  Nepaul,  those  living  about  the  east  sea  and  on 
the  banks  of  the  Sonne  will  suffer  and  women,  princes,  soldier 
"boys  and  men  of  letters  will  perish. 

66.  If  Jupiter  should  be  so  eclipsed,  learned  men,  kings, 
ministers,  elephants  and  horses  will  perish  and  persons  living 
on  the  hanks  of  the  Indus  and  in  the  northern  countries  f will 
suffer  calamities. 

67.  If  Yenus  should  be  so  eclipsed,  the  people  of  Dase- 
raka,  of  Kekaya,  of  Yodheya  and  of  Aryavarta  and  the  Sibees 
will  suffer;  women  and  ra>aisters  will  be  afflicted  with  miseries. 

68.  If  Saturn  should  be  so  eclipsed,  the  people  of  Mar- 
war,  of  Pushkara  If  and  of  Sourashtara,  the  minerals,  the  low 

The  eclipsed  or  eclipsing  Inra-r  or  solar  disc  as  the  case  may  be. 

t Northern  countries  : a river,  probably  an  imaginary  geographical  line,  is 
stated  to  ran  from  the  N.  E tf;  the  S.  W.  of  India  and  countries  to  the  North 
and  West  of  this  line  are  knovt  n :is  the  Noiuhern  and  the  Western  countries 
a-nd  those  to  the  East  and  iSooi  . of  it,  as  the  Eastern  and  the  Southern  coun- 
•jjriea. 

^ Pushkara  : a celebrateu  r ce  of  pilgrimage  now  called  Pokur  5 miles 
from  the  city  of  Ajmere. 


Ch.  5.] 


Brifat  Samhita. 


33 


classes  inliabiting  tbe  Arbuda  hillsj  and  the  hillmen  of  Groman- 
ta  and  Pariatra  will  perish  immediately. 

69.  If  the  solar  or  lunar  eclipse  should  fall  in  the  lunar 
month  of  Kartika^  * persons  who  live  by  fire^  the  Magadas^  the 
eastern  princes,  the  Kosalas,  the  Kalmashas,  the  Surasenas 
and  the  people  of  Benares  will  suffer  miseries  ; the  ruler  of 
Kalinga  with  his  ministers  and  servants  and  the  Kshatriyas  will 
perishbut  there  will  be  prosperity  and  plenty  in  the  land. 

70.  If  the  eclipses  should  fall  in  the  lunar  month  of 
Margasiral,  the  people  of  Cashmere,  of  Oudh  and  of  Pundra  § 
will  suffer  miseries;  quadrupeds  will  perish,  men  of  the  western 
countries  and  Somayajees  If  will  suffer  calamities;  there  will 
be  good  rain  and  prosperity  and  plenty  throughout  the  land. 

71.  If  thf  eclipses  should  fall  in  th©  lunar  month  of  Pou- 
sha,$  the  Brahmins  and  the  Kshatriyas  will  suffer;  the  people 
of  Sindh,  the  Kukuras||  and  the  Yidehas  will  perish;  there  will 
be  slight  rain  and  fear  of  famine  in  the  land. 

72.  If  the  eclipses  should  fall  wthin  the  lunar  month  of 
Magha**,  persons  noted  for  filial  duty,  the  descendants  of  Ya- 
sishta,  men  acting  up  t©  the  Yedic  principles,  elephants  and 
horses  will  suffer  distress;  the  people  oi  Vanga  tt>  of  Anga, 
and  of  Benares  will  be  afilicted  with  miseries;  and  there  will  bo 
rain  suited  to  the  wants  of  the  ryots. 

* Kartika  : October-November,  when  the  fnll  moon  is  in  the  asterism  of 
Kritika. 

t Kosala  : the  Modern  Oudh. 

X Margasira  : November-December,  when  the  full  moon  is  in  the  asterism 
of  Mrigaseersha. 

§ Pundra  :'*the  modern  Bengal  and  Behar. 

^ Somayajees  those  who  have  tasted  of  the  juice  of  the  soma  plant  in  the 
sacrificial  rite  known  as  Soma  yaga. 

$ Pousha  : December- January,  when  the  full  moon  is  in  the  lunar  mansion 
of  Pushya. 

jj  Knkuras : a branch  of  the  Yadavas. 

**  Magha  ; January-February,  when  the  full  moon  is  in  the  constellation  of 
Makha. 

tt  Yanga : East  Bengal. 

'p'  Anga  : Bengal  Proper  near  Bhagulpur. 


S4 


Beihat  Samhita. 


[Oh.  5. 


73.  If  the  eelipses  should  fall  in  the  lunar  month  of 
Phalguna^* * * §  the  people  of  Vanga,  of  Asmaka,  of  Avantika  and 
the  Mekalas  will  be  afflicted  with  disease;  dancers,  food  crops  ^ 
chaste  women,  bow-makers,  the  Kshatriyas  and  ascetics  will 
also  suffer. 

74.  If  the  eclipses  should  fall  inthe  lunarmontb  of  Chaitraf 
painters,  writers,  singers,  prostitutes,  men  learned  in  the  Ve- 
das and  dealers  in  gold, the  people  of  Poundra,  of  Odra,  of  Kek- 
aya  and  of  Asmaka  will  suffer  distress  and  there  will  be  good 
rain  throughout  the  land.f 

75.  If  the  eclipses  should  fall  in  the  lunar  month  of  Vai. 
sakha§  cotton,  giugelly  and  beans  will  be  injured ; the  Iksh- 
wakus,1[  the  Youdheyas,  the  Sakas  and  the  Kalingas  will  suffer^ 
but  there  will  be  prosperity  over  the  land.$ 

76.  If  the  eclipses  should  fall  in  the  lunar  month  of  Jye- 
shta,||  the  Brahmins,  the  Queens  of  the  reigning  sovereign^ 
crops,  rain,  large  gatherings  of  men,  beautiful  persons,  the 
Salpas  and  the  Nishadas  will  suffer. 

77.  If  the  eclipses  should  fall  in  the  lunar  month  of  Asha- 
dha**,  wells,  wet  fields  and  rivers  will  become  dry  ; dealers  in 
roots  and  fruits,  the  people  of  Gandhara,  of  Cashmere,  of  Pu^ 
linda  and  of  China  will  perish;  and  there  will  be  abundance  of 
rain. 

78.  If  the  eclipses  should  fall  in  the  lunar  month  of  Sra_ 

* PhalguDa  : February -March,  when  the  full  moon  is  in  the  asterism  of 
Phalguni. 

t Chaitra : March- April  when  the  full  moon  is  in  the  Constellation  of  Chi- 
tra. 

J Immediately  after  the  eclipse,  the  Commentator  adds. 

§ Vaisakha  : April-May,  when  the  full  moon  is  in  the  lunar  mansion  of  Yai-* 
sakha. 

^ Ikshwakas  : a warrior  tribe. 

$ To  the  end  of  the  year,  adds  the  Commentator. 

II  Jyeshta  : May- June,  when  the  full  moon  is  in  the  asterism  of  Jyeshta. 

. **  Ashadha ; June- July,  when  the  full  moon  is  in  the  constellation  of  Ashadha-i 


Ch.  5.] 


Brihat  Samhita. 


35 


Tana,* * * §  the  people  of  Cashmere,  of  Pulinda  and  of  China,  the 
Yavanas,  the  Kurus,  the  Gandharas  and  the  people  of  Madhya- 
desa  (Central  Provinces),  the  horses  of  Camboja  and  the  crops  of 
Sarat  will  perish;  the  rest  of  mankind  will  enjoy  prosperity 
and  will  be  happy. 

79.  If  the  eclipses  should  fall  in  the  lunar  month  of  Bha- 
drapada  t the  people  of  Kalinga,  of  Vanga,  of  Magada  and  of 
Surat,  the  Mlechas,  the  Suveeras,  the  Daradas  J and  the  Sakas 
will  perish;  pregnant  women  will  miscarry  but  there  will  be 
prosperity  over  the  land. 

80.  If  the  eclipses  should  fall  in  the  lunar  month  of  As- 
wayuja§  the  people  of  Camboja,  of  China,  the  Yavanas,  surgeons^ 
the  Balhikas  and  the  people  living  on  the  banks  of  the  Indus^ 
together  with  the  physicians  of  Anarta  and  of  Poundra  and  the 
Kiratasif  will  perish,  but  there  will  be  prosperity  in  the  land, 

81 . Lunar  and  solar  eclipses  terminate  in  ten  ways  techni- 
cally known  as  1.  dakshinahanUy  2.  vama  hanUy  3.  dahshina  huk- 
shi,  4o  vama  kuhshiy  5.  dakshnia  'payu,  6.  vamajpayUy  7.  sanchar- 
dana,  8.  jarana^  9.  madhyavidarana,  10.  antavidarana>^ 

82.  If  the  lunar  eclipse  should  terminate  at  the  south 
eastern  point  of  the  disc,  the  termination  is  technically  known 
as  dahshina  lianu  (right  jaw)  : crops  will  perish;  facial  disease 
will  afflict  mankind;  princes  will  suffer;  and  there  will  be  good 
rain. 

83.  If  the  lunar  eclipse  should  terminate  at  the  North 
eastern  point  of  the  disc,  the  termination  is  known  as  vama 

* Sravana  : July- August  when  the  full  moon  is  in  the  constellation  of  Sra- 
Yana. 

t Bhadrapada : August-  September,  when  the  full  moon  is  in  the  lanar  man- 
sion of  Bhadarapada. 

J Darada  : a country  bordering  on  Cashmere. 

§ Aswayuja  : September-October,  when  the  full  moon  is  in  the  constellation 
of  Aswayuk. 

^ Kiratas : a barbarous  mountain  tribe. 

$ These  terms  are  explained  in  the  subsequent  stanzas. 


Brihat  Samhita. 


[Cfl.  5. 


hanu  (left)  jaw)*,  the  king’s  son  will  be  afflicted  with  fears;  there 
will  be  facial  disease  and  wars,  but  prosperity  over  the  whole 
land. 

84.  If  the  lunar  eclipse  should  terminate  at  the  southern 
point  of  the  disc,  the  termination  is  known  as  Dakshina  KuksUi 
(right  abdomen):  the  king’s  son  will  suffer  and  the  enemies  in 
the  south  may  then  be  defeated  in  wars. 

85.  If  the  lunar  eclipse  should  terminate  at  the  northern 
point  of  the  disc,  the  termination  is  techincally  known  as  Vama« 
Kukshi  ( left  abdomen,)  : pregnant  women  will  miscarry  and 
crops  will  suffer  to  some  extent, 

86.  If  the  lunar  eclipse  should  terminate  at  the  South 
Western  and  Northwestern  points  of  the  disc,  the  terminations 
are  known  as  Dakshina  Payu  (right  anus)  and  Yama  Payu  [left- 
anus]  respectively:  there  will  be  diseases  of  the  genital  organs 
in  the  case  of  both  terminations,  and  the  Queens  of  reigning 
sovereigns  will  suffer  in  the  case  of  the  latter. 

87.  If  the  lunar  eclipse  should  commence  and  terminate 
at  the  eastern  point  of  the  disc,*  the  termination  is  known  as 
Sanchardana  (vomitting):  there  will  be  prosperity  and  joy  in 
the  land  and  food  crops  will  flourish. 

88.  If  it  should  commence  at  the  eastern  point  and  termi- 
nate at  the  western  point  of  the  disc,  th«  termination  is  known 
as  Jarana  (decaying  ):  mankind  will  be  afflicted  with  hunger 
and  with  wars;  where  then  will  they  go  for  protection? 

89.  If  the  middle  of  the  eclipsed  disc  should  first  begin 
to  clear,  the  termination  is  known  as  Madhya  Yidarana  (central 
opening  ):  there  will  be  anger  at  heart  and  prosperity  over  the 
land  but  not  much  rain. 

90.  If  the  edge  should  first  begin  to  clear  all  round,  while 
there  is  darkness  in  the  centre,  the  termination  is  known  as 


* This,  the  Commentator  adds,  must  be  ntpata  ( abnormal  ) in  its  character. 


Ch.  5.] 


Bkihat  Samhita. 


37 


Anta  Vidarana  (terminal  opeuingr):  Madhyadesa  or  Central  Pro- 
vinces will  suffer,,  and  the  crops  of  Sarat  will  be  injured. 

91.  These  terminations  of  the  lunar  eclipse  apply  to  those 
of  the  solar  eclipse,  the  only  difference  being  that  where  the  East 
has  been  referred  to  in  the  former,  it  must  be  taken  to  mean  the 
West  in  the  latter.*. 

92.  If,  within  seven  days  from  the  termination  of  an 
eclipse  there  should, occur  a dust  storm,  mankind  will  suffer 
from  starvation ; if  there  should  occur  a fall  of  snow  there 
will  be  fear  from  disease ; if  there  should  occur  an  earthquake, 
the  chief  rulers  will*  die. 

93.  If,  within  the  said  period,  there  should  occur  any 
meteoric  fall,  the  ministers  will  die;  if  clouds  of  various  hues 
should  appear,  mankind  will  suffer  from  various  fears ; if 
clouds  should  begin  to  roar,  there  will  be  miscarriage  of  preg- 
nancy ; if  lightning  should  appear,  rulers  and  tusked  animals 
will  suffer. 

94.  If,  within  seven  days  from  the  termination  of  an 
echpse,  there  should  appear  a halo  round  the  Sun  or  Moon, 
there  will  be  disease  in  the  land;  if  there  should  be  an  appea- 
rance of  false  fire  about  the  horizon  mankind  will  suffer  from 
rulers  and  from  fire;  if  there  should  be  a storm,  there  will  be 
fear  from  robbers. 

95.  If  there  should  appear  either  a rainbow,  or  a comet 
club-like  in  shape,  people,  affiicted  with  hunger,  will  suffer 
from  foreign  yoke;  if  there  should  be  either  planetary  conjunc- 
tions or  cometary  appearances  princes  will  be  at  Avar  with  one 
another. 

96.  If  there  should  occur  a fall  of  good  rain  within  the 
said  period,  there  will  be  prosperity  in  the  land  and  the  evils 
described  above  will  disappear. 

* The  commentator  adds,  as  a corollary  from  the  above,  that  such  direc- 
tions  as  S.,  N.,  N.  W.,and  N.  E.,  an  the  case  of  the  Lunar  eclipse  should  be 
taken  to  menN.,  S.,  S.  E.,  and  S.,  W.,  in  the  case  of  the  solar  eclipse. 


38 


Beihat  Samhita. 


[Ch,  5. 


97  If  on  the  new-moon  day  immediately  succeeding  a 
lunar  eclipse,  there  should  occur  a solar  eclipse,  there  will  be  dis- 
sensions among  men  and  discord  between  husbands  and  wives. 

98.  on  the  contrary,  there  should  occur  a lunar  ec- 

lipse on  the  full  moon  day  immediately  succeeding  a solar  ec- 
lipse, the  Brahmins  will  perform  various  sacrificial  rites  and 
mankind  will  be  happy. 

Note  It  may  be  some  relief  to  the  monotony  of  what  has 
preceded  to  append  her©  a description  of  certain  ceremonies 
for  the  expiation  of  the  evil  effects  of  the  eclipses. 

In  lunar  eclipses  those  persons  will  suffer  in  the  sign  of 
whose  nativity  in  which  the  Sun  was,  the  moon  happens  to  be 
eclipsed. 

Again,  if  an  eclipse  should  occur  in  the  sign  in  which  the 
Sun  was  in  one^s  nativity,  then  the  persons  on  his  father^s  side 
will  suffer  ; if  in  the  sign  in  which  the  Moon  was  in  one^s  na- 
tivity then  the  persons  on  his  mother’s  side  will  sufier. 

Again  that  person  will  also  suffer  in  whose  Lagna*  or 
Nakshatra  the  sun  or  moon  is  eclipsed. 

If  the  eclipse  should  occur  in  the  19th  constellation  from 
that  in  which  the  moon  was  in  one’s  nativity  the  person  will 
be  afflicted  with  miseries,  if  he  should  fail  to  perform  the  re- 
quisite expiatory  rites  : it  therefore  behoves  a person  to  avert 
the  evil  effects  of  an  eclipse  by  gifts,  by  fire  ceremonies,  by 
the  worship  of  the  Devas,  by  japa  and  by  (eclipse)  ceremoni" 
al  ablutions. 

He  should  get  a serpent  made  of  gold  or  flour  and  pre- 
sent it  to  Brahmins  on  the  day  of  the  eclipse.  He  shall  then 
recite  the  mrittyunjaya  and  other  well  known  mantras.  As 
all  the  devas  are  present  on  the  occasion  of  an  eclipse,  man- 

* Lagna  : that  particular  sign  of  the  zodiac  which  is  cut  by  the  eastern 
horizon  at  the  time  of  one’s  birth. 


Ch.  5.] 


Brihat  Samhita. 


39 


trag  or  japas  ouglit  nofc  to  bo  recited  or  performed  while  the 
eclipse  progresses  but  only  when  the  eclipse  begins  to  decline 
and  terminate,  though,  during  the  former  period  new  man- 
tras may  be  learnt.  As  regards  the  ablutions  above  referred 
to,  we  quote  from  Matsyapurana  ; 

That  person,  in  the  lagna  of  whose  nativity  an  eclipse  oc- 
curs, ought  to  bathe  in  the  water  purified  by  m antras  and  by 
drugs  as  prescribed  below.  On  the  occasion  of  the  eclipse 
he  shall  adorn  four  Brahmins  with  garlands  of  white  flowers 
and  with  white  sandal  paste ; he  shall  fix  four  pots  in  four 
places  near  each  other  and  he  shall  bring  earth  from  places 
frequented  by  elephants,  by  horses,  by  chariots  and  by  cows 
and  from  ant-hills  and  from  before  the  entrance  to  the  palaces 
of  kings  as  well  as  from  deep  waters,  and  throw  the  earth  into 
the  water  pots;  he  shall  also  put  into  the  water  panchariga- 
vya^y  pearls,  yellow  pigment,  lotus,  the  conch  shell,  a piece  of 
crystal,  white  sandal  paste,  mustard  seed,  arlconuts,  the  frag- 
rant root  of  the  plant  Andropogon  Muricatus  and  the  resin  hde~ 
Hum  (exudation  of  the  Amy^'is  Agallowchum);  he  shall  then 
invoke  the  devas  into  the  pots.  The  Brahmins  shall  then  say 
aloud. 

May  all  the  seas,  rivers,  and  other  waters  come  into 
these  pots  for  the  purification  of  our  Master”. 

The  Brahmins  shall  then  invoke,  by  their  respective 
mantras,  the  devas  presiding  over  the  eight  points  of  the 
compass.  They  shall  also  invoke  into  the  pots  the  deities 
presiding  over  all  creatures  and  things,  with  or  without  mo- 
tion, in  the-three  worlds  as  well  as  Brahma,  Vishnu  and  the 
Sun.  They  shall  also  chant  verses  from  the  Kik,  Yajus  and 
Sama  Vedas.  The  pots  also  shall  have  threads  tied  round 
their  necks  and  adorned  with  white  flowers  and  whit©  paste. 
The  master  shall  then  be  bathed  with  the  charmed  waters 


# 


Panchagavya  j a roixtare  of  the  cow’s  milk,  curd,  batter,  urire  and  dang. 


40 


Brihat  Samhita. 


[Ch.  6. 


after  bathing  the  master  shall  present  cloths  and  cows  to 
Brahmins  and  worship  his  favourite  gods.  At  the  com- 
mencement of  the  eclipse  the  Brahmins  shall  tie,  over  the 
master^s  head,  a cloth  containing  bits  of  the  five  precious 
gems  and  a gold  plate  with  mantras  inscribed  in  it.  The 
gold  plate  shall  then  be  presented  to  the  Brahmins. 

He  who  bathes  as  prescribed  above  will  not  only  be 
purified  from  the  evil  effects  of  an  eclipse  but  will  gain  the 
higher  worlds. 


CHAPTER  VL 
On  Mars. 


1 . The  retrograde  motion  of  Mars  is  of  five  kinds  known 
technically  as  \,ushnaj  2.  asrumukhay  3.  'uyalay  4.  lohitanana 
and  5.  nistrimsa  musala,  * 

2.  If  Mars  should  begin  to  retrograde  from  the  7th^  8th 
or  9th  constellation  from  that  in  which  he  reappears  t after 
his  conjunction  with  the  Sun,  such  retrograde  motion  is  techni- 
cally known  as  ushna : when  Mars  should  reappear  after  his 
next  conjunction  with  the  Sun,  persons  who  live  by  fire  will  be 
afflicted  with  disease. 

3.  If  Mars  should  begin  to  retrograde  from  the  10th, 
11th,  or  12th  constellation  from  that  of  his  re-appearance, 
such  retrograde  motion  is  known  as  asrumukha : when  Mars 
should  re-appear  after  his  next  conjunction  with  the  Sun, 
juice  will  be  injured  and  there  will  be  disease  and  drought. 

4.  If  he  should  begin  to  retrograde  from  the  13th  or 
14th  constellation  from  that  of  his  reappearance,  such  retro- 

* These  terms'  are  explained  in  the  subsequent  stanzas, 
t Mars  is  said  to  disappear  when  within  17  degrees  from  the  San  and  to  re- 
appear when  beyond  it. 


Ch.  6.] 


Brihat  Samhita. 


41 


^rade  motion  is  known  as  vyala : when  he  should  disappear 
before  his  next  conjanction  with  the  Sun_,  wild  boars  and  fierce 
animals  will  be  ajfflicted  with  distress. 

5.  If  Mars  should  begin  to  retrograde  from  the  15th 

or  the  16th  constellation  from  that  of  his  reappearance,  such  re- 
trograde motion  is  known  as  riidhiranana ; at  the  time  of  such 
reappearance  mankind  will  be  afilicted  with  disease  in  the  face 
and  with  various  fears,  but  there  will  be  prosperity  in  the 
land.  ' 

6.  If  he  should  begin  to  retrograde  from  the  17th  or 

* 

the  I8th  constellatidh  from  that  of  his  reappearance  such  re- 
trograde motion  is  known  as  Asimusala ; when  Mars  is  in  his 
re-retrograde  motion,  bands  of  robbers  will  be  afflicted  with  dis- 
tress and  there  will  be  drought  and  wars  in  the  land. 

7.  If  Mars  should  re -appear  in  the  constellation  of  Poor- 

vaphalguni  [sacred  to  Bhaga]  or  in  that  of  XJttaraphalguni 
[sacred  to  Aryama],  retrograde  in  the  constellation  of  Uttara- 
shadha  [sacred  to  Visvedeva],and  disappear  in  the  constellation 
of  Bohini  [sacred  to  Brahma],  he  will  afflict  the  three  worlds 
with  miseries.  . . r 

’ I.  1.  i. 

8.  If  Mars,  after  his  re-appearance  in  the  constellation 
of  Sravana,  should  retrograde  in  that  of  Pushya,  anointed 
tnonarchs  will  be  afflicted  with  miseries  ; those  countries  and 
those  persons  will  suffer  in  whose  Nakshatra,  Mars  should 
begin  to  reappear.* 

9.  If  Mars  should  pass  through  the  middle  of  the  cons^ 

tellatioQ  of  aud  retrograde  back  through  the  same, 

the  ruler  of  the  Pandia  country  will  perish  and  mankind  will 
suffer  from  wars  and  drought. 

10.  If  Mars  should,  after  cutting  through  the  constella- 
tion of  Makha,  approach  the  middle  of  Visakha,  there  will  be 

* For  the  Ntikahtra  of  a conntrj  vide.  Chap,  on  Koortna  Yibhaga.  > 


42  Brihat  Samhita.  [Ch,  6. 

famine  in  fhe  land  ; if  he  should  cut  through  the  constellatiori 
of  Bohini;  thfere  will  be  fearful  deaths  in  the  land. 

11.  If  Mara  should  pass  to  tha  south  of  the  constellation 
of  Bohini,  rulers  will  suder^  prices  will  rise  and  there  will  be 
little  rain ; if  Mars  should  appear  enveloped  in  smoke  or  with, 
a pointed  flames  the  people  of  Parijatra  * will  perish. 

12.  If  Mars  should  pass  through  the  constellations  of 
Bohini,  Sravana,  Moola^  Uttara  Phalguni;  Uttarashadha,  Utta- 
rabhadrapada  and  Jyeshta,  he  will  destroy  clouds  charged 
with  rain. 

13.  If  Mars  should  pass  through  the  constellations  of 
^ravana,  Makha,  Punarvasu^  Hasta^  Moola^  Poorvabhadrapada 
Asvini,  Visakha  and  Bohini  there  will  be  prosperity  in  the  land® 

14.  If  Mars  should  appear  with  a large  and  clear  disc 
or  red  like  the  flower  of  Kimsuka  (Butea  Frondosa)  or  of 
Asoka  (Jonesia  Asoka  Roxb)  or  of 'clear  and  fine  rays  or 
like  molten  gold  or  if  he  should  pass  through  the  northern 
path,  t rulers  will  be  happy  and  there  will  be  prosperity  in 
the  land. 


CHAPTER  Vll. 

* 

On  Mercury. 


1.  Mercury  never  reappears  J after j his  conjunciion 
with  the  sun  without  upsetting  the  existing  order  of  things  « 
Le  causes  fear  from  flood,  from  fire  and  from  storms  and  para  « 
lizes  trade  by  abnormally  enhanciag  or  lowering  the  price  of 
food  grains. 


* Pariyatra  : the  central  or  the  western  portion  of  the  Vindhaya  chain 
which  skirts  the  province  of  Malwa. 

t Northern  path  ; according  to  Girga,  the  nine  constellations  from  Bharani 
to  Makha  constitute  the  Northern  path;  the  nine  from  Poorvaphalgnni  to 
Moola  constitute  the  middle  path  and  the  nine  from  Poorvashadha  to  Aswini 
constitute  the  Southern  path. 

il  Mercury  disappears  when  within  14  degrees  from  the  Sun  and  re-app©ars 
cyond  that  distancei  hut  when  retrograde,  the  limit  is  only  12  degrees. 


Ch.  7.] 


Brihat  Samhiat, 


43 


2.  If  Mercury  should  cut  through  the  constellatious  of 
Sravana,  Dhanishata,  Rohini,  Mrigaseersha^  and  Utbarashadha, 
sacred^  respectively  to  Vishnu,  Ashtavasu,  Brahama,  the 
Moon  and  Visvedea,  his  disc  appearing  to  rub  against  those  of 
the  stars,  he  causes  drought  and  disease  in  the  land. 

3.  If  Mercury  should  cut  through  the  five  constellations 
from  Ardra  to  Makha,  mankind  will  suffer  from  wars,  from, 
hunger,  from  disease  and  from  drought. 

4.  If  he  should  cut  through  the  six  constellations  from 
Easta,  his  disc  appearing  to  rub  against  those  of  th©  stars, 
cows  will  suffer,  the  price  of  liquid  substances  and  of  juice 
will  rise,  but  there  will  be  abundance  of  food  grains  in  the  land. 

5.  If  he  should  cut  through  the  constellations  of  Ubta- 
raphalaguni  (sacred  to  Ariyama,  the  Sun),  of  Kritika  (sacred  to 
.Agni,  the  fire),  of  Uttarabhadra  and  of  Bharani (sacred  to  Yama), 
all  living  creatures  will  be  afflicted  with  disease  in  blood,  in 
flesh,  in  bones  and  the  like. 

6.  If  he  should  cut  through  the  constellations  of  Aswi- 
ni  (sacred  to  the  Aswini  Devas),of  Sataya  (Sacred  to  Varuna), 
of  Moola  and  Revati,  tradesmen,  physicians,  boatmen,  crea- 
tures of  water  and  horses  will  suffer, 

7.  If  he  should  cut  through  one  of  the  constellations  of 
Purvaphalguni  and  PurvashadhaandPurvabhadra  mankind  will 
Suffer  from  hunger,  from  wars  and  thieves  and  from  disease. 

8.  In  ParasaiVs  work  on  Astronomy,  Mercury  has  seven 
courses  assigned  to  him;  they  are  technically  known  as  1. 
Prakrita,  2.  Vimisra,  3.  Sumkshipta  4 Teekkshna  5.  Yoganta 
6.  (jhoia,  and  7.  Papakhya, 

9.  If  Mercury  should  pass  through  the  constellations  of 
Svati,  Bharani,  Rohini,  and  Krittika,  sacred  respectively  to 
Vayu,  to  Yama,  to  Pitamaha  and  to  Agni,  his  course  is  techni- 
cally known  as  Prakrita.  If  he  should  pass  through  the  constel- 
lations of  Mrigaseersha,  Ardra,  Makha,  Aslesha,  sacred, 


44  , j Beihat  Samhita.  , [Ch.  7. 

respectiyely,  to  the  Moon,  to  Siva,  to  the  Pritris  and  to  the 
serpent,  his  course  is  known  as  Alisragati.  , 

10.  It  Mercury  should  pass  through  the  constellations 
of  Pushya^  Punarvasu  and  the  two  Phalgnnis,  his  course  is 
known  as  Sankshipta.  If  he  should  pass  thro agh  the  constel- 
lations of  the  two  Bhadrapadas,  of  Visakha,  of  Aswini  and 

of  Kevati,  his  course  is  known  as  Teekshna. 

>■  ' ^ . 

] ] . If  Mercury  should  pass  through  the  constellations  of 

Moola  and  the  two  Ashadhas,his  course  is  known  as  Yogantika, 
If  such  course  should  lie  through  the  constellations  of  Srava- 
na,  Chittra,  Dhanishta  and  Satabhishak,  it  is  known  as  Ghora. 

M ! 1 • I 

12.  , If  Mercury  should  pass  through  the  constellations 
of  Hasta,  Anuradha,  Jyeshta,  sacred  respectively  to  the  Sun, 
to  Mittra  and  to  Indra  his  course  is  known  as  Papa.  We  now 
proceexi  to  state  the  periods,  in  days,  of  the  effects  of  Mercu- 
ry^s  ^reappearance  in,  and  course  through,  particular  lunar 

!•  S ■ ■()  I () 

mansions. 

13.  The  effects  of  the  Prakrita,  and  other  courses  of 
Mercury  described  above,  will  last  respectively  for  40,  30,  22, 
18,  9,  15  and  11  days. 

14.  When  Mercury  is  in  his  Prakrita  course,  there  will 

be  increase  of  health,  of  rain  and  of  crops,  aad  there  will  be 
prosperity  in  the  land.  If  he  should  be  either  in  his  Samk- 
shipta  or  Misra  course  mankind  will  be  partly  happy  and 
partly  miserable.  When  in  his  remaining  four  courses.  Mer- 
cury brings  on  adversity.  ^ 

15.  According  to  Devalsya,  the  effects  of  the  (direct) 
the  AtivuTifa  (over  retrograde),  the  vahra  (retrograde)  and 
the  vihala  (of  irregular  rate),  motions  of  Mercury  will  last  res* 

pectively  for  30,  24,  1 2 and  6 days. 

1 

16.  When  Mercury  is  in  his  ruju  course,  mankind  will 
b©  happy  j when  in  his  ativalcra  course  he  will  destroy  wealth 
when  he  is  in  bis  vahra  course  there  will  be  wars  in  the  land  i 


Brihat  Samhita. 


45 


Ch.  7.] 


and  when  he  is  in  his  vihala  course  mankind  will  be  afflicted 
with  fear  and  disease. 

17.  If  Mercury  should^  after  his  conjunction  with  the 
Sun,  reappear  in  the  month  of  Ashadhaor  Sravana  or  Vysakha, 
or  Magha,  there  will  be  fear  in  the  land  ; but  if  he  should  be 
in  his  course  in  thQse  months  there  will  be  happiness  in  the 

land. 

* 18.  If  Mercpry  should  so  reappear  in  the  month  of 
Kartika  or  Aswayuja,,  there  will  be  wars  in  the  land^  and  man- 
kind will  suffer  from  robbers^  from  fire,  from  disease,  from 
flood  and  from  hunger. 

19.  When  Mercury  should  disappear,  the  chief  towns 
in  the  land  will  be  besieged  by  enemies,  but  when  he  reappears 
the  siege  will  be  raised.  According  to  some  writers,  the  latter 
occurs  only  when  Mercury  reappears  as  an  evening  star;  and 
learned  writers  also  say  that  the  chief  rulers  will  also  get  an 
accession  of  territories. 

20.  If  Mercury  should  be  of  the  color  of  gold  or  of  a 
parrot  or  if  it  should  resemble  the  hue  of  the  Sasyaka*  gem, 
or  if  his  disc  should  appear  glossy  or  big  in  size,  mankind  will 
be  happy;  but  if  otherwise,  they  will  be  afflicted  with  miseries. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

On  Jupiter. 

1.  The  years  of  Jupiter  take  their  names  from  the 
several  Nakehatras  in  which  he  reappearsf  after  his  conjunc- 
tion with  the  Sun ; and  these  names  are  identical  with  the 
names  of  the  lunar  months. 

/ — ' — — ■ — 

* Sasyaka  : a species  of  precious  stone  colored  like  the  inner  fruit  of  a co« 
coa*  nut  j perhaps  an  opal. 

f Jupiter  disappears  when  within  11  degrees  from  the  Sun  and  reappears 
beyond  that  limit- 


46 


Brihat  Samhita, 


[Ch.  8» 


2.  These  years  beginning  from  Kartika  follow,  each^ 
two  stars  beginning  from  Krittika  *,  but  the  fifth,  the  eleventh 
and  the  twelfth  years  follow,  each,  three  Nakshatras.f 

3.  In  the  Karttika  year  of  Jupiter,  cart  drivers,  persons 
that  live  by  fire,  and  cows  will  be  afflicted  with  miseries  j there 
will  be  disease  and  wars  in  the  land ; flowers  of  blood  and 
of  yellow  color  will  thrive. 

4.  In  the  Margasira  year  of  Jupiter  there  will  be 
drought,  and  crops  will  be  injured  by  animals,  by  rats,  by 
grass  hoppers  and  by  birds  ; there  will  be  disease  in  the  land 
and  rulers  will  be  at  strife  even  with  their  friends. 

5.  In  the  Pousha  year  of  Jupiter  mankind  will  be  happy; 
princes  will  cease  their  enmity  to  one  another;  the  price  of 
fcod  crops  will  become  cheap  doubly  or  tribly  and  there  wilj 
be  an  increase  of  ceremonies  to  secure  special  benefits.  * 

6 . Imthe  Magha  year  of  Jupiter  there  will  be  an  increase, 
of  respect  to  fathers  ; all  creatures  will  be  happy,  health  and 
rain  will  prevail  over  the  land;  the  price  of  food  grains 
will  fall;  and  mankind  will  bo  more  friendly  than  ever. 

7.  In  the  Phalguna  year  of  Jupiter  there  will  be  pros- 
perity , rain,  and  crops,  here  and  there ; women  will  suffer 
miseries ; th  eves  will  become  powerful  and  rulers  tyrannic. 

8.  In  the  Chaitra  year  of  Jupiter  there  will  be  alight 
f Thus,  when  Jupiter  reappears, 

I,  In  Krithika  or  Rohini  bis  year  is  known  as  Karitika, 

2.  In  Mrigasirshaor  Ardra  Margasira 

***** 

5 In  Pocrvnphalgnni  or  XJttaraphalguni  or  Hasta  Phalguna 

***** 

II.  In  Satabishak  or  Poorvaproshtapada  or  Uttarapro8htapada..,Pro8htapada 

11.  In  Revati  or  Aswati  or  Bharani  ...  ...  Aswaynja 

^ Such  ceremonies  are  known  as  Ponshtika  Karma,  the  cor^relatire  of  this 
being  San tika  Karma,  which  aims  at  the  removal  of  existing  evils — the  two 
together  go  by  the  name  of  Naimittika  (purposive)  Karma,  whose  cor-relative 
again  is  Nitya  Karma  i.e.  ceremonies,  the  daily  cbseiTaiice  of  which  is  enjO'^ 
ined  by  the  Shastras. 


Ch.  8.] 


BEIHiT  SlMHITl. 


47 


rain,  good  food^  and  happiness;  rulers  will  become  mild; 
leguminous  grains  will  increase  and  fair  men  will  sulfer  mise- 
ries. 

9.  In  the  Vysakha  month  of  Jupiter  prln  ces  with  their 
subjects  will  be  virtuous, fearless,  and  happy;  men  will  engage 
in  sacrificial  rites  and  thare  will  also  be  growth  o£  crops. 

1 0.  In  the  Jyeshta  year  of  J upiter  the  chief  men  of  every 
caste,  of  every  family,  of  every  opulent  class  and  of  every  vil- 
lage as  well  as  princes  and  learned  men  will  suffer  miseries;  and 
grains  excepting  Kangu *  * and  pel  gr^iins  will  suffer. 

11.  In  the  iA.shadha  year  of  Jupiter  there  will  be  crops 
here  and  there  and  drought  iu  other  places,  mankind  will 
not  be  very  happy;  and  rulers  will  be  afflicted  with  cares. 

12.  In  the  Sravana  year  of  Jupiter  mankind  will  be 
happy  and  crops  will  thrive  and  ripen  well;  wicked  men  and 
impostors  will  suffer  with  their  followers. 

13.  In  the  Bbadrapada  year  of  Jupiter  the  produce  of 
creepers  will  thrive  as  well  as  t'le  first  crops  ; but  the  second 
crops  will  fail  and  there  will  be  prosperity  in  some  places  and 
fear  here  and  there. 

14.  In  the  Aswayaja  year  of  Jupiter  the  rainfall  will  be 
incessant ; mankind  will  be  happy  and  prosperous  ; all  livinc^ 
creatures  will  grow  strong  and  food  supply  will  be  abundant » 

15.  When  Jupiter  passes  through  the  northern  path  * 
there  will  be  health  and  happiness  in  the  land;  when  he  passes 
through  the  southern  path  the  reverse  of  these  will  be  tha 
case ; and  when  he  passes  through  the  middle  path  there 
will  he  rfeither  much  of  the  former  nor  much  of  the  latter. 

16.  If,  in  one  year,  Jupiter  should  pass  through  a space 
of  two  stellar  divisions,  there  will  be  prosperity  in  the  land; 

♦ Kangu  : a kind  of  Panic  seed,  Panicum  Italicum,  several  varieties  of 
which  are  cultivated  and  form  articles  of  fool  for  the  poor, 

* These  paths  have  already  been  explained, 


48 


Brihat  Samhita, 


[Ch.  8. 


if  he  should  pass  tlirougli  two  and  a half  of  such  divisions 
there  will  not  be  much  of  it;  and  if  at  any  time,  he  should 
pass  through  over  tw)  and  a half  of  these  divisions  crops 
will  be  injured. 

17.  If  the  disc  of  Jupiter  should  appear  of  the  color  of 
fire,  there  will  be  fear  from  fire ; if  yellow,  there  will  be  disease 
in  the  land;  if  dark-blue,  there  will  be  wars ; if  green,  suffer- 
ing from  thieves,  and  if  of  blood  color,  suffering  from  weapons. 

18.  If  the  disc  of  Jupiter  should  appear  of  the  color  of 
smoke  there  will  be  drought ; if  it  should  be  visible  during 
day,  rulers  will  perish  and  if  it  should  appear  large  and  clear 
at  night,  mankind  will  be  happy. 

19.  The  Nakshatras,  Rohini  and  Krittika,  form  the  body 
of  the  Vatsara  Puruaha,*  the  two  Ashadhas  form  his  navels 
Ayalya  forms  the  heart  and  Makha,  the  heart-bladder  ; when 
benefic  planets  pass  through  these,  there  will  be  happiness  in 
the  land  ; if  malefic  planets  should  pass  through  the  body,  there 
will  be  suffering  from  fire  and  winds ; if  they  should  pass 
through  the  navel,  there  will  be  suffering  from  starvation ; if 
they  should  pass  through  the  heart-bladder,  roots  and  fruits 
will  suffer,  and  if  they  should  pass  through  the  heart,  crops 
will  perish. 

20.  Multiply  by  11  the  number  of  past  solar  years  from 
the  time  of  the  Saka  prince  (Salivahana),  and  take  4 times  the 
product ; to  it  add  8589,  and  divide  the  sum  by  3750. 

21.  Add  the  quotient  to  the  said  number  of  solar  years 
from  the  time  of  the  Saka  prnice,  and  divide  the  sum  by  60; 
the  remainder  represents  the  number  of  years  by  which  Jupiter 
has  advanced  in  his  cycle  of  60  years  ; (call  it  J.);  divide  this 
remainder  by  5,  the  quotient  wUl  give  the  number  of  yugas 
preceding  the  currents  yuga  of  Jupiter  calculated  from  Vishnni 


* Yathfara  Parasha  : the  12  years  cycle  of  Jupiter  personified. 


Ch.  8.] 


Beihat  Samhita. 


49 


(the  name  of  the  first  of  Jupiter’s  12  Yagas,  each  consisting 
of  5 years);  and  the  remainder  will  give  the  years  by  which 
Jupiter  has  advanced  in  his  current  Yuga. 

22.  Divided  (Jupiter’s  years)  by  12  and  multiply  the 
remainder  by  9 and  divide  the  product  by  4 ; the  quotient 
will  represent  the  ^ number  of  Naksliatras,  calculi tetl  from 
Dhanishta,  passed  over  by  Mean  Jupiter  and  the  remainder 
the  number  of  Navamsas  passed  over  by  him  in  the  next 
shatra. 


Note: — We  will  now  explain  the  principles  involved  in 
the  calculations  contained  in  the  three  preceding  stanzas  : 
AJcalpa  contains  1000,  Chatnr  Yugas;  in  a kalpa,  according 
to  Ariyabhatta  the  number  of  aiderial  revolutions  or  years  of 
the  Su7i  is  4,32,') 0,00,000;  and  the  nmmber  of  siderial  revolu. 
tions  of  Jupiter  is  361224000;  but  as  each  revolution  contains 
12  years,  the  number  of  Jupiter’s  years  in  the  same  period 
is  4 37,06  88,000,  in  other  wards_,  in  a Chatur  yuga. 

No.  of  Solaiq  . No.  ot  Jupiter’s')  . .^2  20,000;  13, 70(588 
years  J years  J 

: : 1875  : 1897 
or  ; : 3750  : 3794,  to  suit 
ourselves  to  the  figures  in  tho  text.  So  that  for  every  3,750 
solar  years  we  get  3,750  + 44  years  of  Jupiter  ; therefore  a solar 
year  = l + 34To  years  of  Jupiter. 

We  will  now  find  out  the  number  of  years  by  which  Jupi- 
ter had  advanced  in  the  Kaliyug  at  the  commencement  of  the 
Saka  era,  it  being  known  that  the  number  of  solar  years  during 
the  said  period  is  3179.  We  have  the  following  proportion^ 
3750  : 3794  : : 3179:  years  of  Jupiter  require^. 

X = 3794  x3179  qoicii9(i  u ^ 

= 3 . the  number  ot  years  ot 

37o0  uijui  ! 

Jupiter  from  the  commencement  of  the  Kaliyug  to  the  com- 

inen:ement  of  the  Saka  era. 

2s  ow  it  is  known  that  Kaliyuga  commenced  in  the  year 


Brihat  Sam  hit  a. 


50 


[Ch.  8 


Vijaya  (the  27th  year  from  Prabhava,  wliicb  is  the  first  year 
in  a cycle  of  60  years  of  Jupiter), 


Therefore  3216^4M  3242-^-j|-g-,  being  divided 

by  60j  the  remainder  will  gi^e  the  particular  year  of  Jupiter 
(in  bis  cycle  of  60  years)  from  Prabhava  at  the  time  of  the 
commencement  of  the  S ika  era  and  this  remainder  is 
2-t-i|-|  which  is  the  3rd  year  or  the  year  Suhla  of  the  cycle, 

>,Tniv  01126  _ 8626 

ivOW  ^3^0  — 3 7 5 0- 

Coming  down  to  the  period  subsequent  to  the  commence- 
ment of  the  Saka  era  we  have,  as  already  stated, 

1 :1  jyq-q-  : : No,  of  past  Solar  years  : x.  No.  of  past  JupitePs 
years. 

X = No.  of  past  ■>  , 44  x No.  of  past  Solar  years 

Solar  years  J 3750* 


Adding  to  this  the  frlw  which  elapsed 

from  the  beginning  of  Prabhava  to  the  time  of  the  commence- 
ment of  the  Saka  era  we  get. 


No.  of  past  44  x No.  of  past  Solar  years  8626 

t-'olar  years  J 375Q  ^ + -375Q 

No.  of  past  _p  f 4 No  of  past  Solar  years  + 8626 

Solar  years  J 3 750 


when  this  is  divided  by  60  the  remainder  will  give  the  year 
of  Jupiter  in  his  cycle  of  60  years  commencing  from  Prabha- 
va ; call  this  remainder  J. 


Now  as  there  are  12  yugas  (each  of  5 years)  in  a cycle 
of  60  years  J,  being  divided  by  5,  the  quotient  will  give  the 
number  of  yugas  that  have  elapsed  from  the  first  yuga  of 
Vishnu  and  the  remainder  the  number  of  years  by  which 
Jupiter  has  advanced  in  the  current  yuga.  (For  the  names 
of  these  yugas  vHe  stanza  23). 

This  brings  us  to  the  end  of  Stanza  21.  Stanza  22  aims 
at  discovering  the  particular  lunar  mansion  or  Nakshatra  in 
which  Jupiter  might  happen  to  be  at  any  given  time  / Time 


Ch.  8.] 


Brihat  Samhita. 


51 


takeu  by  Mean  Jupiter  to  go  over  a sign  of  Zodiac  is  called 
a year  of  Jupiter. 

Therefore  a number  of  such  years  will  represent  the  nutnber 
of  signs  g’one  over  by  Mean  Jupiter  during  the  time.  In  12 
such  years  IMean  Jupiter  makes  a circuit  of  the  heavens.  Now 
the  year  Prabhava  commences  when  Jupiter  enters  (or  re- 
appears according  to  commentator)  in  the  constellation  of 
DhanisJita  in  the  month  of  Maghn_,  and  Mean  Jupiter  takes 
12  years  from  Dha?nishta  to  it  again.  If  therefore  J were 
divided  by  12j  the  remainder  will  show  the  nutnber  of  years 
taken  by  Mean  Jupiter  to  go  over  the  number  of  lunar  mansions 
lying  between  Dhanishta  and  the  particular  lunar  mansion 
in  which  Jupiter  might  happen  to  be  at  the  given  time.  Call 
this  remainder  B.  As  stated  above,  B,  which  represents  the 
number  of  years,  also  represents  the  number  of  Zodiacal 
sio^ns.  Now  as  each  sign  contains  21  lunar  mansions  the 
number  of  lunar  mansions  required  (from  Dhauishta)  = 2 j x B 
= -|  B.  This  brings  us  to  the  end  of  ^Stanza  22. 

It  will  be  observed  from  the  above  that  the  figure  given 
in  sranza  20  is  8589  and  not  8626.  The  fact  is  that  in  our 
process  we  adopted  Aryabhatta’s  figure,  there  being  a differ- 
ence of  opinion  among  Hindu  Astronomers  regarding  the 
number  of  the  siderial  revolutions  of  Jupiter  in  a kalpa.  For 
instance:  Baskaracharriar  gives  it  as  361  226  455  against 
364  224  000  of  Aryabhatta.  But  what  we  want  is  Yaraha  Mihi- 
ra^s  figure.  As  his  Astronomical  work,  Panchasindhantika,  is 
now  lost  we  cannot  give  it  exactly;  but  calculating  backwards 
from  the  figure  85b9  appearing  in  the  text,  we  find  the  num- 
ber of  siderial  revolutions  of  Jupiter,  according  to  Yaraha 
Mihira  to  be  364  190  000.  This  is  probably  the  correct  figure. 

23.  .The  twelve  jngas  of  Jupiter’s  cycle  are  known  as 
belonging  to  the  Bevasl.  Vishnu,  2.  Jiijpiter,  3.  Indra,  4* 
Agni  (fire),  5.  Ivashta,  6.  Ahirhudhnya,  7.  The  Fitris,  8.  Vasu- 


52  Brihat  Samhita.  [Ch.  8. 

^eva,  9.  Soma  (ibe  thood),  10.  Indragni,  II.  Asvinideva,  12. 
Bhaga. 

24.  The  five  years  of  each  yuga  are  known  as  1.  Sam- 
vatsira,  2.  Parivatsaraj  3.  Idavatsara.,  4.  Anuvatsataj  5. 
Idvatsara.  These  are  sacred  respectively  to  1 . Agni  (fire), 
2.  Arha  (the  8uq),  3.  Chandra  (the  Moon),  4.  Prajapati  (the 
Creator),  5.  Ttiidra  (the  Destroyer). 

25.  Generally  in  every  yuga,  there  will  be  good  rain  in 
the  first  year  * and  at  the  beginning  f of  the  second  year  ; 
excessive  rain  in  the  third  year;  moderate  rain  at  the  end  (of 
the  rainy  season)  of  the  fourth  year  ; and  slight  rain  the  in  the 
fifth  year. 

26.  In  the  first  four  yugas  there  will  be  prosperity 
in  the  land;  in  the  next  or  middle  four  there  will  not  be 
much  of  it  ; and  in  the  last  four  mankind  will  suffer  miseries, 

27.  When  Jupiter  reappears  at  the  beginning  of  the 
constellation  of  Dhanishta  in  the  month  of  Magha,  the  first 
year  of  the  cycle  of  60  years  of  Jupiter  known  as  Prabhava 
commences.  En  it  all  creatures  will  be  happy. 

28.  In  the  same  year  there  will  be  drought  in  certain 
places  and  suffering  from  storm  and  fire;  the  crops  will  be 
injured;  phlegmatic  maladies  will  afflict  mankind;  neverthe- 
less mankind  will  be  happy, 

29-  The  next  year  is  known  as  Vihhava  the  third  as 
Stihla,  the  fourth  as  Pramoda,  and  the  fifth  as  Prajapati:  in 
each  of  these  years  mankind  will  be  happier  than  in  the  next 
preceding  year. 

30.  In  the  same  four  years  there  will  be  good  growth 
of  the  Sali  J crop,  of  sugar  cane,  of  barley  and  other  crops 

* In  the  four  months  from  August  to  November  according  to  the 
coraraeBiator. 

t Of  the  rainy  season— August  and  September,  according  to  the  com« 
mentator. 

% Sali ; a species  of  rice 


Ch.  8.] 


Brihat  Samhita. 


53 


in  til©  land;  mankind  will  bo  freed  from  all  fears  and  they 
will  live  at  peace^  in  happiness  and  without  the  vices  of  the 
Kaliyuga. 

31.  The  five  years  of  the  second  yaga  are  known  as 
1.  Angira,  2.  SrimiJ^ha  3.  Bhava,  4.  Yuva  and  5.  Dhatri. 
Of  thesoj  during  the.  first  three  years  mankind  will  enjoy  hap- 
piness and  during  the  last  two  they  will  not  enjoy  much 
of  it. 

32.  In  the  first  three  of  the  above  five  years  there 
will  be  abundance  of  rain  and  mankind  will  be  freed  from 
fears  and  anxieties;  in  the  last  two  years  the  rainfall  will 
be  moderate  but  disease  and  wars  will  afflict  mankind. 

33.  The  five  years  of  the  third  yuga  sacred  to  Indra 
are  known  as  I Eeswara,  2.  Bahudhanya,  3.  Pramadhi  I. 
Vihrama  and  5.  Vrisha.  In  the  first  two  years  mankind 
will  enjoy  the  happiness  of  Kritayug,  In  the  year  Framadhi 
they  will  feel  miserable  bat  in  the  years  Vikrama  and  Vrisha 
they  will  again  be  happy. 

35,  The  first  year  of  the  fourth  yaga  is  known  as  Ghi- 
trahhanu',  in  it  mankind  will  be  happy.  The  second  is  known 
as  Suhhami.  In  it  mankind  will  be  neither  happy  nor  mise- 
rable; there  will  however  be  disease  in^  the  land  but  no 
deaths  in  consequence. 

30.  The  next  year  is  known  as  Tarana;  in  it  there  will  be 
abundance  of  rain.  The  next  is  known  as  Parthiva;  in  it 
crops  with  thrive  well  and  mankind  will  be  happy.  The  fifth 
year  is  knnwn  as  Yyaya’j  in  it  amorous  sensations  will  pre- 
vail over  the  land. 

3 7.  The  first  year  of  the  next  yuga  sacred  to  Tuoasta 
is  known  as  Sarvajit.  The  next  year  is  known  as  Sarixim 
dhari  The  next  three  years  are  Virodhi,  Yikrita  and  Khara:  in 
the  second  of  these^  mankind  will  be  happy  and  they  will 
be  afflicted  with  fears  in  the  other  years. 

38.  The  five  years  of  the  next  yuga  are  1 . Nandana 


54 


Brih&t  Samhita. 


[Ch.  8 


2.  Vijaya,  3.  Jaya  4.  Manmatha  5.  D armilkha:  during  the 
first  three  years  there  will  be  happiness  in  the  land  ; in  Man- 
matha  mankind  will  feel  neither  happy,  nor  miserable  and  in 
the  year  Durmukha  they  will  feel  miserable. 

39.  The  years  of  the  seventh  yaga  are  1.  Hemalamha, 
2.  Vilamhij  3.  Viharij  4.  Sarvari  and  5.  Plava. 

40.  In  the  first  of  these  years  crop-?  will  generally  be 
injured  and  there  will  be  storm  and  rain ; in  the  second  year 
crops  will  not  grow  in  abundance  and  the  rainfall  will  not  be 
much  ; in  the  third  year  mankind  will  be  afflicted  with  fears 
and  there  will  be  much  rain;  in  the  fourth  year  there  will  be 
famine;  in  Plava j the  fifth  year,  there  will  be  prosperity  in 
the  land  and  also  much  rain. 

41.  The  first  year  of  the  next  yuga  sacred  to  Visvedeva 
is  Sohhakrit;  the  next  year  is  known  as  Subhahrlt;  the  third  is 
Krodhi;  and  the  remaining  years  are  known  as  /isvavasii  and 
Parahhava. 

42.  During  the  first  two  years  mankind  will  be  happy; 
during  the  third  they  will  feel  exceedingly  miserable  and 
during  the  last  two  years  they  will  be  neither  happy  nor  miser- 
able; but  in  the  year  Parabhava  there  will  be  fear  from  fire  and 
suffering  from  weapons  and  from  disease;  the  Brahmins  and 
cows  will  also  suffer. 

43.  The  first  year  of  the  ninth  yuga  is  Plavanga,  the 
next  year  is  known  as  Keelaha^  the  third  is  known  as  Soumya 
and  the  last  two  years  a^e  known  as  Sadharana  and 
B.odhakrit ; of  these,  during  the  years  Keelaka  and  Soumya  man- 
kind will  be  happy. 

44.  In  the  year  Plavanga  mankind  will  suffer  much;  in 
Sadharana  there  will  be  slight  rain  and  crops  will  suffer;  in 
the  fifth  year  there  will  be  a variety  of  rainfall  and  crops 
will  thrive. 


Brihat  Samhita. 


55 


Ch.  8.^, 


45.  The  first  year  of  the  next  yuga  sacred  to  Indragni  is 
known  as  Paridhavi;  the  remaining  years  are  Pramadi,  Anan- 
da,  TlaJishasa  and  Anala. 


4G.  In  the  year  Paridhavi  the  Madhyadesa  will  suffer 
the  ruling  princes  will  perish,  there  will  be  slight  rain  and  fea^ 
from  fire;  in  the  year  Pramadi  mankind  will  be  disposed  to 
be  inactive;  villagers  will  be  at  strife;  red  flowers  and  red  seed 
will  be  destroyed. 


* 5 

47.  In  the  next  year  mankind  will  be  happy.  In  the 
years  Rahshasa  and  Anala  there  will  be  deaths  and  decay  in 
the  land;  in  Rakshafea  again  the  summer  crops  will  thrive  and 
in  Anala  there  will  be  fear  from  fire  and  much  suffering  in  the 
land. 


48.  The  fi-ve  years  of  the  eleventh  yoga  are  1.  Pingala^ 
2.  Kalaynhta,  3.  Sidharta,  4.  Poudra,  5.  Burmati.  In  the 
first  year  there  will  be  much  rain  and  fear  from  thieves  and 
mankind  will  suffer  from  consumption  of  the  lungs  and  the 
like  asthmatic  complaints. 

49.  In  the  year  Kalayalcta  mankind  will  suffer  from  vari- 
ous evils;  but  in  Sidharta  they  will  be  happy  in  more  ways 
than  one.  In  the  year  Roudra  mankind  will  suffer  much  and 
there  will  be  loss  and  ruin  in  the  land.  In  Burmati  there  will 
be  moderate  rain. 


50  In  the  twelveth  yuga  sacred  to  god  Bhaga,  the  first 
year  is  known  as  Bundubhi;  the  crops  will  thrive  well.  The 
next  year  is  known  as  TJdgari;  in  it  the  ruling  sovereigns  will 
perish  and  there  will  not  be  good  rain, 

51.  The  third  year  is  known  as  in  it  there 

will  be  fear  from  the  attack  of  tasked  animals,  and  mankind 
will  suffer  from  disease.  The  fourth  year  is  known  as  Krodha; 
in  it  there  will  be  anger  in  the  land  and  countries  will  be  ruined 
in  consequence  of  internal  strife. 


56 


Brihat  Samhita. 


[Ch.  9. 


52.  The  last  year  of  the  last  yuga  is  Kshaya  ; there 
Will  then  be  mnch  rain  in  the  land  ; the  Brahmins  will  bo 
afflicted  with  fear  and  farmers  will  prosper.  The  Vysyas  and 
Sudras  will  be  happy  as  also  persons  that  deprive  others  of 
their  property.  Thus  have  been  described  briefly  the  effects 
of  the  sixty  years  of  Jupiter’s  cycle. 

53.  If  the  disc  of  Jupiter  be  full  of  pure  rays  and  large 
and  appear  of  the  color  of  white  jasmine  or  white  w ater  lily 

or  crystal  and  if  he  does  not  suffer  by  ocoultation  by  or  con- 

« 

lunction  with,  other  planets  and  when  he  is  in  hi^  good  course 
mankind  will  be  happy. 


CHAPTER  IX, 

On  Venus. 

1.  The  ecliptic  is  divided  into  nine  divisions  known  as 
Veedhis  (paths),  According  to  some  each  division  consists  of 
three  constellations  beginning  from  Aswini  : these  divisions 
are  technically  known  asl.  Naga  (serpent),  2.  Gaja  (ele- 
phant) , 3.  Iravata  (the  divine  elephant  or  sei’pent),  4.  Fn- 
shahha  (bull),  5.  Go{cowJ,  6.  Jaradgava  (old  ox),  7.  iPr/- 
ga  (deer),  8.  Aja  (ram),  9.  Bahana  (fire). 

2.  According  to  others  the  Naga  Veedhi  C07isi3ts  of  the 

constellations  of  Swati,  Barani  and  Kritih  a ; the  Gaja  Veedhi 
of  the  three  constellations  from  Boliini ; the  IravataVeedhi 
ofthe  three  from  ; the  VrisLiabha  Veedhi  of  the 

three  from  ; the  Go  Veedhi  of  Aswati^  Bevat,  Poorva- 

hJiadrapada  and  Vttarahhadrapada. 

3.  The  Jaradgava  Veedhi  consists  of  the  three  constella- 
tions from  Sravana  ; the  Mriga  Veedhi  of  the  three  from 
Amtradha ; the  Aja  Veedhi  oiHasta,  Visaliha,  and  (liltra  ; and 
the  Dahana  Veedhi  consists  of  th  e two  constellations  Poorva- 
shadha  and  Uttarashadha. 


Cn.  0.] 


Brihai  S^mhita. 


57 


4.  Of  tlie  nine  Yeedhis  the  first  three  are  known  as  the 
northern  Yeedhis  ; the  next  three  as  the  central  Veedhisand 
the  last  three  as  the  sonthern  Veedhis,  A, gain,  in  the  case  of 
each  three  the  first  is  known  as  the  northern  Yeedhi^  the  second 
as  the  central  Yeedhi  and  the  last  as  the  Southern  Veedhi. 

5.  According  to  some  the  position  of  a Yeedhi  follows 
that  of  the  Yoga  Tara  (chief  star)  of  the  parfcicukr  constel- 
lation; so  that  if  the  star  should  be  on  the  north  of  the  eclip- 
tic^ the  Veedhi  is  known  as  the  northern  one;  if  on  the  eclip- 
tic, it  is  known  as  the  central  one  and  if  on  the  south  of 
the  ecliptic,  it  is  known  as  the  southern  one. 

6.  According  to  others  the  nine  constellations  from 
BJiarani  form  the  northern  Yeedhi  or  path,  the  nine  from 
Foorvaphalguni  form  the  central  path  and  the  nine  from 
Poorvashadha  form  the  Southern  path. 

7.  If  writers  on  Jotishasastra  should  disagree  it  is  not 
for  me  to  determine  th©  correct  view  ; I have  only  to  state  the 
views  here  of  several  authors. 

8.  If  Venus  should  either  disappear  or  reappear  * in  a 
northern  Veedhi  there  will  be  prosperity  and  happiness  in  the 
land;  if  in  a central  Veedhi  there  will  not  be  much  of  either; 
and  if  in  a southern  Yeedhi  mankind  will  be  afflicted  with 
miseries^ 

9.  If  Venus  should  disappear  or  reappear  in  the  several 
Yeedhis  beginning  from  the  northernmost  one  the  condition 
of  the  world  will  respectively  be  1.  very  excellent,  2.  ex- 
cellent, 3-.  good,  4.  fair,  5.  moderate,  6.  tolerable,  7.  poor, 
8.  very  poor,  9.  miserable. 

10.  The  four  constellations  from  Bharani  are  known  as 
the  first  mandala  (circle  or  division).  If  Yenus  should  re- 
appear in  it  there  will  be  prosperity  in  the  land  ; the  people  of 

* Yenns  disappears  when  within  10  degrees  from  the  San  and  reappears 
"beyond  that  limit. 


58  Brihat  Samhita.  [Ch,  9 

Vang  a and  of  A7iga,  fhe  Maliishas^  tlie  Balhikas^  and  the 
Kalingas  will  be  afflicted  with  fears. 

11  If  Venus,  who  so  reappears  in  the  Slid  circle,  should 
be  crossed  by  a plant,  the  rulers  of  the  BJiadras,  of  the  Aswas^ 
of  the  Surasenakas  and  of  the  Youiheyas  and  oi  Kotivarsha* 
will  perish. 

12  The  four  constellations  from  drdru  form  the  second 
Mandala  or  circle;  if  Venus  should  reappear  in  it,  the  rainfall 
will  be  moderate  and  the  growth  of  food  crops  will  also  be 
moderate  ; the  Brahmins  will  suffer,  especially  those  who  are 
wicked. 

13.  If  Venus  who  so  reappears  in  the  said  circle,  should 
be  crossed  by  a planet,  the  Mle^has,  forestmen,  persons  that 
live  by  dogs,  the  hill  men  of  Gomanta  and  Gonarda,  the  Chanii. 
dalas,  the  Sudras  and  the  people  of  Videha  will  become  wick- 
ed and  lawless. 

14,  The  five  constellations  from  Magha  form  the  third  man- 
dala: if  Venus  should  reappear  in  it,  crops  will  suffer;  there 
will  also  be  suffrjring  from  hunger  and  robbers.  Chandalas 
will  prosper  and  there  will  be  an  intermingling  of  castes. 

15.  If  Venus,  who  so  reappears  in  the  said  mandala, 
should  be  crossed  by  a planet,  shepherds,  hunters,  the  Sudras, 
the  Pundras,  the  border  Mlechas,  the  Sulikas,  forestmen, 
the  Dravidas  and  persons  who  live  close  to  the  sea  will  be 
afflicted  with  miseries. 

16.  The  three  constellations  from  Swati  form  the  fourth 
mandala;  if  Venus  should  reappear  in  it,  mankind  will  be  free 
from  fear;  the  Brahmins  and  Kshatryas  will  prosper  and  friends 
will  turn  into  enemies. 

17.  If  Venus,  who  so  reappears  in  the  said  mandala,  should 


* Kotivarsha  : the  city  of  Devikote  in  the  Coromandel  Coast. 


Ch.  9.] 


Brihat  Samhita. 


59 


b©  crossed  by  a planofc,  the  chiefs  of  the  banters  will  perish; 

Ikshwakas,  the  border  Mlechas,  the  people  of  Avanti  and 
of  Polinda  and  the  Sam33aa^  will  also  perish. 

18.  The  five  constellations  from  Jyeshta  form  the  fifth 
man  da]  a;  if  Venus  should  reappear  in  it,  the  people  of  Cash- 
mere,  the  Asrnakas,  the  Matsyas,  those  living  on  the  banka 
of  the  Oharudevi  and  in  the  country  of  Avanti  will  suffer  from 
hunger,  from  thieves  .and  from  disease. 

19.  If  Venus  who  so  reappears  in  the  said  mandala  should 
be  crossed  by  aplanetythe  Abhiras,  the  Dravidas,  the  Ambas- 
tas,  the  Trigartas,  the  Sourashtras,  the  people  of  Sindh  and 
of  Souviraka  and  the  ruler  of  Benares  will  perish. 

20.  The  six  constellations  from  Dhanishta  form  the  sixth 
mandala;  if  Venus  should  reappear  in  it  there  will  be  wealth 
and  prosperity  in  the  land  and  cows  will  thrive  and  crops  will 
be  abundant  but  fear  in  certain  places. 

21.  If  Venus,  who  so  reappears  in  the  said  mandala^ 
should  be  crossed  by  a planet,  the  Sulikas,  the  people  of 
Candahar  and  of  Avanti  will  be  afflicted  with  miseries.  The 
Videhas  will  perish.  The  servants  of  the  border  Mlechas  and 
of  the  Yavanas  will  prosper. 

22*  If  Venus  should  reappear  or  be  crossed  by  a planet 
in  the  western  portion  of  the  mandalas  beginning  from  Swati 
and  from  Jyeshta  or  in  the  eastern  portion  of  the  mandala 
beginning  from  Magha,  there  will  be  happiness  in  the  land;  in 
all  the  other  mandalas  the  effects  will  be  the  same  as  those 
already  described  whereever  V^enus  might  happen  to  reappear 

or  be  then  crossed. 

23.  If  Venus  should  be  visible  before  sunset  th.re  will 
be  fear  in  the  laud;  if  visible  throughout  the  day,  mankind 
will  suffer  from  hunger  and  from  disease  ; if  visible  at  mid- 
day in  conjunction  with  the  moon,  the  king  s army  and  capital 
city  will  Buffer. 


eo 


BrIHAI  SiMHITA. 


[Ch.  9o 


24.  If  Yenus  should  pass  throug^h  the  constellation  of 
Krittika;  the  Barth  will  be  so  much  enundated  with  water  as 
to  make  its  surface  even. 

25.  If  Yenus  should  pass  through  the  constellation  of 

Rohini^  Earth  will  assume  the  same  appearance  of  death  and 
devastation  as  if  she  was  going  through  the  ceremony  of  Ka- 
palika  for  the  expiation  of  the  sin  of  murder. 

26.  If  Yenus  should  enter  the  constellation  of  Mrigasir- 
sha,,  juice  and  crops  will  suffer;  if  she  should  enter  the  cons- 
tellation of  Ardra,  the  people  of  Kosala  and  of  Kalinga  will 
suffer  and  there  will  be  abundance  of  rain. 

27-  If  Yenus  should  enter  the  constellation  of  Punar- 
vasuj  the  people  of  Ashmaka  and  of  Yidarbha  will  become  law- 
less. If  Yenus  should  enter  the  constellation  of  Pushya, 
there  will  be  good  rain;  singing  and  dancing  parties  will  suffer 

28.  If  Yenus  should  enter  the  constellation  of  Aslesha 
there  will  be  much  suffering  from  serpents;  it  Yenus  should 
pass  through  the  constellation  of  Magha_,  elephant  keepers  or 
ministers  will  suffer  and  there  will  be  abundance  of  rain. 

29.  If  Yenus  should  pass  through  the  constellation  of 
Poorvaphalguni,  hill  men  and  the  people  of  Pulinda  will 
perish  and  there  will  be  abundance  of  rain  ; if  she  should 
pass  through  the  constellation  of  Ufctaraphalguni,  the 
people  of  Kuru,  of  Jangala  and  of  Panchala  will  perish,  and 
thei  e will  also  be  rain. 

30.  If  she  should  pass  through  the  constellation  of 
Hasta,  the  Kouravas,  and  painters  will  suffer;  there  will  be 
no  rain  ; well-diggers  and  birds  will  suffer.  If  she  should 

enter  the  constellation  of  Chittra,  there  will  be  good  rain. 

31.  If  she  should  enter  the  constellation  of  Swati, 
there  will  be  much  rain  ; servants,  merchants  and  boatmen 
will  become  wicked  and  lawless.  If  she  should  entei  the 


Ch.  9.] 


Beihat  Samhita. 


61 


constellation  of  Visaklia^  there  will  be  good  rain  and  trades- 
men will  suffer. 

32.  If  she  should  enter  the  constellation  of  Annsha> 
rulers  will  be  at  strife  ; if  she  should  enter  the  constellation 
of  Jyesta^  the  chief  rulers  will  suffer;  if  she  should  enter  the 
constellation  of  Moola^  physicians  that  deal  in  medicinal 
plants  will  suflper.  In  each  of  these  three  cases  there  will  be 
drought  in  the  land.  . 

o 5 

33.  IfYenus  should  enter  the  constellation  of  Poorva- 
shadha_,  the  creatures^  of  water  will  suffer  ; if  she  should 
enter  the  constellation  of  Uttarashadha_,  diseases  will  in- 
crea'ie.  If  she  should  enter  the  constellation  of  Sravana, 
diseases  of  the  ear  will  afflict  mankind.  If  she  should  enter 
the  constellation  of  Dhanishta,  heretics  will  suffer. 

34.  If  Venus  should  enter  the  constellation  of  Satahhi- 
shak,  drunkards  or  dealers  in  liquor  will  suffer  ; if  she  should 
enter  the  constellation  of  Poorvabhadra^  gamblers  will  suffer 
as  well  as  the  Kouravas  and  the  Panchalas,  and  there  will  be 
rain  in  the  land. 

35.  If  Venus  should  enter  the  constellation  of  Uttara- 
bhadrUj  fruits  and  roots  will  be  injured  ; if  she  should  enter 
the  constellation  of  Revati,  travellers  will  suffer;  if  she 
should  enter  Aswini^  horsekeepers  will  suffer  and  if  she 
should  enter  Bharanq  hillmen  and  the  Yavanas  will  suffer. 

36.  If  Venus  should  either  reappear  or  disappear  in  the 
8th,  14th,  or  15th  lunar  day  of  the  waning  moon,  the  Earth 
will  be  flooded  with  water. 

37.  ]f  Jupiter  and  Venus  should  be  opposite  to,  that 
is,  180^  apart  from,  each  other  and  if  they  should  be  at  the 
same  time  due  east  and  west  of  each  other,  mankind  will 
suffer  from  disease, from  fears  and  from  sorrow,  and  there 

will  be  no  rain. 


62 


Beihat  Samhita. 


[Ch.  9. 


38.  If  the  course  of  Jupiter,  Mercury,  Mars  and 
Saturn  should  just  precede  that  of  Venus,  mankind,  eleph- 
ants and  magicians  will  be  at  strife  among  themselves  ; storms 
and  deaths  will  afflict  mankind. 

39.  Friends  will  cease  to  be  friends  ; the  Brahmins 
will  cease  to  perform  religious  ceremonies  properly;  there 
will  be  no  rain  ; and  mountains  will  be  riven  asunder 
thunderbolts. 

40.  If  the  course  of  Saturn  should  just  precede  that  of 
Venus,  the  Mlechas,  cats,  elephants,  asses,  buffaloes,  black 
grains,  hogs,  barbarians,  the  Sudras  and  travellers  in  the 
south  will  suffer  by  diseases  of  the  eye  and  by  windy  dis- 
orders. 

41.  If  the  course  of  Mars  should  just  precede  that  of 
Venus,  mankind  will  suffer  from  fire,  from  weapeons,  from  hun- 
ger, from  drought  and  from  thieves ; all  the  creatures  and 
objects  of  the  north  will  suffer  and  the  sky  will  be  filled  with 
fire,  lightning  and  dust. 

42.  If  the  course  of  Jupiter  should  just  precede  that  of 
Venus,  he  will  destroy  objects  that  are  white,  the  Brahmins, 
cows  and  temples ; the  east  will  suffer ; there  will  be  a fall  of 
hail  from  the  clouds  and  diseases  of  the  neck;  the  crops  of 
Sarat  will  thrive  well. 

43.  If  the  course  of  Mercury  should  just  precede  that  of 
Venus,  and  if  Mercury  should  then  have  either  disappeared  or 
reappeared,  there  will  be  rain  in  the  land  ; diseases  and  bili- 
ous jaundice  will  afflict  mankind;  the  crops  of  Greeshma  will 
flourish ; ascetics,  persons  who  have  performed  sacrificial 
rites,  physicians,  dancers  or  wrestlers,  horses,  the  Vysias,  cows, 
rulers  in  their  chariots  and  all  yellow  objects  will  perish  and 
the  west  will  suffer. 

44.  If  Venus  .should  be  of  the  color  of  fire,  there  will  be 
fear  from  fire ; if  of  blood  color,  there  will  be  wars  in  the  land 


CH.  10.1 


Beihat  Samhita. 


63 


if  of  the  color  of  burnisliod  c^old,  there  will  be  disease;  if 
greeoj  there  will  be  asthmatic  complaints;  if  ashy-pale  or 
black,  there  will  be  drought  in  the  land. 

45.  If  Venus  should  be  of  the  color  of  coagulated  milk, 
of  the  white  water  lily,  or  of  the  moon,  or  if  her  course  be 
direct,  or  if  she  should  be  the  successful  planet  in  conjunc- 
tions, mankind  will  enjoy  the  happiness  of  Kritayuga. 


CHAPTEU  X. 


On  Saturn. 

1 . If  the  disc  of  Saturn  should  appear  glossy  and  if  his 
course  should  lie  through  the  constellations  of  Sravana,  Swati, 
Hasta,  Ardra,  Bharani,  or  Poorvaphalguni,  the  Earth  will  be 
covered  with  water. 

2.  If  his  course  should  lie  through  the  constellations  of 
Ayulia,  Satablnshak,  Jyeshti,  there  will  be  prosperity  in  the 
land  but  slight  rain ; if  his  course  should  lie  through  Moola, 
mankind  will  suffer  from  hunger,  from  weapons  and  from 
drought.  We  will  now  proceed  to  state  the  effects  of  Saturn^s 
course  through  each  of  the  27  constellations. 

3.  If  the  course  of  Saturn  should  lie  through  the  first 
constellation  of  Aswini,  horses,  horse-keepers,  poets,  physi- 
cians and  ministers  will  perish.  If  it  should  lie  through  the 
constellation  of  Bharani,  dancers,  players  on  musical  instru- 
ments, vocal  singers,  low  people  and  deceitful  men  will  perish. 

'4. 

4.  If  his  course  should  lie  through  the  constellation  of 
Krittika,  persons  that  live  by  fire  and  commanders  of  armies 
will  perish  j and  if  through  Rohini,  the  people  of  Kosala,  of 
Mathra,  of  Benares  and  of  Panchahi  and  carriage  drivers  will 
suffer. 

5.  If  the  course  of  Saturn  should  lie  through  the  cons- 


64 


Brihat  Samhita. 


[Oh.  10* 


tellation  of  Mrigaseersha,  the  people  of  Vatsa,  * the  ofEciating 
priests  iu  sacrificial  rites  as  well  as  the  persons  that  perform 
Ihemj  reverend  men  and  the  people  of  Madhyadesa  will  suffer 
miseries;  if  through  Ardra^  the  people  of  Paratha,  and  of 
Ramata,  oil  mongers,  washermen  and  thieves  will  suffer. 

6.  If  the  course  of  Saturn  should  lie  through  the  cons- 
tellation of  Punarvasuj  the  Panchalas,  the  border  Mlechas 
and  the  people  of  Surat,  of  Sind  and  of  Souviraka  will  suffer 
miseries  ; if  his  course  should  lie  through  the  constellation  of 
Pushya,  bell  ringers,  criers,  the  YavanaS;  tradesmen,  deceit- 
ful men  and  flowers  will  suffer. 

7.  If  the  course  of  Saturn  should  lie  through  the  cons- 
tellation of  Ayulya,  the  creatures  of  water  and  serpents  will 
suffer  ; if  through  the  constellation  of  Magha,  the  Balhikas^ 
the  Chinese,  the  people  of  Oandahar,  of  Sulika  and  of  Paratha, 
the  Vysias,  store  houses  and  merchants  will  suffer. 

8.  If  his  course  should  lie  through  the  constellation  of 
Poorvaphalguni,  juice  sellers,  prostitutes,  virgins  and  the 
Maharashtras  will  suffer  miseries;  if  through  Uttaraphalgunfi 
kings,  ascetics,  jaggery,  salt,  water  and  the  town  of  Taksha- 
sila  in  the  Punjab  will  suffer. 

9.  If  the  course  of  Saturn  should  lie  through  the  cons- 
tellation of  Hasta,  barbers,  mill-men,  thieves,  physicians, 
weavers,  elephant  keepers,  prostitutes,  the  Kosalakas,  and 
garland  makers  will  suffer-  • 

10.  If  the  course  of  Saturn  should  lie  through  the  cons- 
tellation of  Ohitra,  women,  writers,  painters,  various  utensils 
will  suffer;  if  through  Swati,  the  people  of  Magada,  reporters^ 
messengers,'  charioteers,  mariners,  dancers  and  the  like  will 

suffer  miseries* 

11.  If  the  course  of  Saturn  should  lie  through  the 
constellation  of  Yisakha,  the  Trigartas,  the  Chinese  and  the 


Vatsa  ; name  of  a country;  its  chief  town  is  Kousumbha. 


[Ch.  10 


Brihat  Samhita. 


65 


Kulootas,  saffron,  shel-lac,  crops,  every  thing  of  bright,  red 
or  crimson  color  will  suffer. 

12.  If  the  course  of  Saturn  should  lie  through  the 
constellation  of  Auuradha,  the  Kulutas,  the  Tanganas  * * * § and 
the  Khasas,  the  people  of  Cashmere,  ministers,  drivers,  and 
bell-ringers  will  suffer  and  friends  will  turn  into  enemies. 

13.  If  the  course  of  Saturn  should  lie  throuofh  tho 

o 

% 

constellation  of  Jyeshta,  the  king’s  chaplain,  the  king’s  favo- 
rites, valient  soldiers,  and  mixed  crowds  of  men  of  different 
castes  will  suffer ; if  through  Moola.  the  people  of  Benares, 
of  Kosala,  and  of  Panchala,  fruits,  medicinal  plants  and  sol- 
diers will  suffer. 

14.  If  his  course  should  lie  through  the  constellation 
of  Poorvashadha,  the  people  of  Anga,  of  Vanga,  of  Kosala, 
of  Girivraja  f of  Magada,  of  Pundra,  of  Mitila  and  of  Tam- 
ralipta  J will  suffer  miseries. 

15.  If  the  course  of  Saturn  should  lie  through  the  cons- 
tellation of  Uttarashadha,  the  people  of  Dasarna,  § the  Yava- 
nas,  the  people  of  Oojein,  barbarians,  the  people  of  Paryatra, 
and  the  Kunty-bhojas  will  suffer. 

16.  If  the  course  of  Saturn  should  lie  through  Sravana 
public  officials,  the  chief  Brahmins,  physicians,  and  priests 
and  the  people  of  Kalinga  will  suffer  miseries.  If  his  course 
should  lie  through  Dhanishta,  the  ruler  ef  Magada  will 
become  triumphant;  and  treasury  officers  will  prosper. 

17.  If  the  course  of  Saturn  should  lie  through  the 
constellations' of  Satabhishak  and  Poorvabhadra,  physicians, 
poets,  drunkards  or  those  that  deal  in  liquor,  tradesmen  and 
ministers,  will  be  afflicted  with  miseries  *,  if  it  should  lie 

* Tanganas ; name  of  a people  in  the  upper  part  of  the  Yall«/  of  Saraym. 

^ Girivraja  : name  of  the  capital  of  Magada. 

j Tamralipta  : name  of  a people  near  the  western  mouth  of  the  Ganges. 

§ Dasarna  : name  of  a people  living  south  cast  of  Madhyadesa  in 
centxe  of  Hindustan. 


66  Beihat  Samhita.  [Ch,  11 

t 

through  the  constellation  of  Uttarabhadra^  dancers^  trayel- 
lers^  women  and  gold  will  suffer. 

18.  If  the  course  of  Saturn  should  lie  through  Revati, 
the  servants  of  the  reigning  sovereigns,  the  people  of  Krou- 
chadvipa,  * * * § the  crops  of  Sarat,  barbarians  and  the  Yavanas 
will  suffer. 

19.  If,  while  Saturn  is  in  Kritika,  Jupiter  should  be  in 
the  constellation  of  Visakha,  mankind  will  then  become  very 
wicked.  If  both  the  planets  should  be  in  one  and  the  same 
constellation  the  chief  towns  will  suffer. 

20.  If  Saturn  should  appear  variegated  in  color,  birds 
will  perish  ; if  yellow,  there  will  be  fear  from  hunger  ; if  of 
blood  color,  there  will  be  wars  in  the  land  and  if  of  ashy 
color,  mankind  will  be  very  much  at  strife. 

21.  If  Saturn  should  appear  as  bright  as  the  cats’eye 
gem  or  pure  or  of  the  color  of  the  bana  (a  black  flower)  or 
Atasi  t flower,  mankind  will  be  happy.  Whatever  may  be  the 
color  of  Saturn,  the  persons  who  or  objects  which  correspond 
to  the  particular  color  will  suffer.  [J] 

CHAPTER  XI. 

On  Comets  and  the  like. 

1.  Having  examined  the  treatises  of  Garga,  Parasara, 
Asita,  Devaia  and  many  others  on  Ketus  §,  I now  proceed  to 
give  a clear  account  of  the  same. 

2.  'ihe  reappearance  or  disappearance  of  the  Ketus  is 

not  subject  to  astronomical  calculations.  The  Ketus  are  of 
three  kinds— celestial,  etherial  and  terrestrial, 

* Krouchadvipa  or  Krouncha  : a Tnonntain  or  part  of  the  Himalayan 
range  sitnated  in  the  eastern  part  of  the  chain  on  the  north  of  Assam. 

t Atasi : common  flax  bearing  a blue  flower. 

j e,  g : if  white  the  Brahmins,  if  red  the  Kshatriyas,  if  yellow  the  Vysyas, 
if  black  the  Sudras  and  if  bine  the  Chandalas  will  suffer. 

§ Ketus:This  term  is  defined  by  the  Author  in  stanza  '3,  and  is  made 
to  include  Comets,  meteors  falling  stars,  solar  and  lunar  spots  and  the  like 
lumiiious  bodies. 


[Ch.  11  Beihat  Samhita.  67 

3.  Ketus  are  luminous  appearances  resembling  fire  but 
without  the  power  to  consume  objects-the  glow  worm,  certain 
phosphorescent  appearances,  gems,  precious  stones  and  the 
like  excepted, 

4.  The  etherial  Ketus  appear  in  flag  staffs,  implements 
of  war,  houses,  trees,  horses,  elephants  and  the  like.  The 
celestial  Ketus  appear  in  stellar  regions  and  the  terrestrial  oaes 
appear  in  pits  and  low  grounds  in  the  surface  of  the  Earth. 

5.  Some  writers*  say  that  the  Ketus  are  1 01  in  number^ 
othersf  say  that  they  are  1,000  in  number;  Naradasays  that 
there  is  but  one  Ketu  which  appears  in  various  shapes  at 
various  times.  ’ • 

6.  Whether  there  is  one  Ketu  or  many,  the  effects  to  be 
described  are  various  and  these  effects  depend  on  their 
reappearance  or  disappearance  (at  partiaular  times  and  places) 
their  positions,  the  heavenly  bodies  wdth  which  they  might 
appear  to  be  in  contact  and  on  their  colors. 

7.  The  effects  will  last  for  as  many  months  as  the  num- 
ber of  days  during  which  the  Ketus  continue  to  be  visible;  if 
visible  for  months,  the  effects  will  last  for  years^J).  d'he  effects 
will  commence  after  three  weeks  from  such  appearances. 

8.  Generally  if  the  luminous  body  or  comet  be  smalf  . 
clear,  glossy,  straight,  transient,  white  and  visible  either 
immediately  after  their  appearance  or  some  time  afterwards 
there  will  be  health  and  happiness  in  the  land. 

9.  If  it  be  the  opposite  of  these,  or  of  the  shape  of  the 
rainbow  or  with  two  or  three  tails,  mankind  will  not  be  happy, 

10’  The  Ketus  or  comets  that  resemble  garlands,  gems 
and  gold  a^e  named  Kirana  Ketus  and  are  2 5 in  number;  they 
have  tails  and  appear  in  the  East  and  in  the  West;  they  are 
the  sons  of  the  Sun,  and  when  they  appear,  princes  will  begin 
to  be  at  strife, 

* Parasara  for  iostance. 

f Garga  for  instance. 

J The  Commentator  says:  From  I to  24)dajB  of  visibility  the  effects  will 
last  from  1 to  24months.  From  25  to  30  days  of  visibilicy,  for  two  years  ; if 
visible  for  2i-  months  for  instance,  the  effects  will  last  for  21  + Ji  or  4 years. 


6i  Bkihii  SiMHiTA,  [Oh.  11 

11.  The  Kettts  that  are  of  the  color  of  the  parrot,  of 
fire,  of  Bhandhu-Jivika*  flower,  of  Shel-lac  or  of  blood  are 
the  sons  of  Agni  (fire)  and  appear  in  the  South-  East;  they  are 
25  in  number;  when  they  appear  mankind  will  be  afflicted 
with  fears. 

12.  The  Ketus  or  comets  whose  tails  are  bent  and  which 
are  of  sharp  rays  and  black  are  the  sons  of  Yarha;  they  are 
25  in  number;  they  appear  in  the  South  ; when  they  appear 
there  will  be  deaths  in  the  land. 

13.  The  Ketus  or  comets  f that  appear  like  a mirror, 
are  round  in  shape  without  tails  bub  with  rays  and  looking 
like  oil  or  water  are  the  sons  of  the  Barch;  they  are  23  in  num- 
ber, and  appear  in  the  North-East;  when  they  appear  man- 
kind will  be  afflicted  with  fear  and  hunger. 

14.  The  Ketus  or  Comets  that  appear  bright  like  the 
moon,  silver,  snow,  white  jasmine  and  the  white  water  lily 
are  the  sons  of  the  moon  ; they  appear  in  the  North  and  are  3 
in  number;  when  they  appear  mankind  will  be  happy. 

15.  The  single  Comet  possessing  three  tails  and  three 
colors  is  named  Brahmadanda  and  is  the  son  of  Brahma;  it 
appears  anywhere;  when  it  appears  the  world  will  come  to  an 
end. 

16.  i Thus  have  been  stated  briefly  101  Ketiis  and  we 
will  now  proceed  to  state  clearly  the  1,000  Ketus  already  re- 
ferred to. 

17.  The  Comets  thabappear  in  the  North  and  North 
East  are  84  in  number;  they  are  the  sons  of  Venus;  they  have 
large,  white  and  shining  discs  and  when  they  appear  mankind 
will  not  be  happy. 

18.  The  comets  that  appear  glossy,  with  rays  and  double 
tailed  are  60  in  number;  they  are  the  sons  or  Saturn; 'they  ap- 
pear anywhere  and  are  named  Kanaka  Ketus;  when  they 
appear  mankind  will  feel  very  misserable. 

* BhandbuiWika:  Pentapetes  Phoenicea—  a plant  with  a red  flower 
which  opens  at  mid.daj  and  withers  away  the  next  morning  at  snnriie, 
caUed in tamil 


Brihat  Samhita. 


69 


[Ch.  11 


19.  The  Comets  which  are  white,  of  single  disc,  withoafc 
tails  and  glossy  are  named  Vikacha  Ketus  and  are  the  sons 
of  Jupiter.  They  are  65  in  number  ; they  appear  in  the 
South  and  when  they  appear  mankind  will  not  be  happy. 

20.  The  Comets  that  are  neither  very  bright  nor  clearly 
visible  to  the  naked  eye,  and  that  are  long  and  white  are 
named  Taskara  Ketua ; they  are  the  sons  of  Mercury  , they 
appear  any  where  and  are  51  in  number  ; when  they  appear 
mankind  will  feel  miserable. 

21.  The  Comets  which  are  of  the  color  of  blood  or  fire 
and  with  three  tails  are  named  Kumkuma  Ketus  : they  are 
the  sons  of  Mars  and  are  60  in  number . they  appear  in  the 
North  and  when  they  appear  mankind  will  feel  miserable. 

22.  The  Ketus  that  appear  as  spots  in  the  solar  and 
lunar  discs  are  33  in  number.  They  are  named  as  Tamasa 
and  Keelaka  Ketus.  They  are  the  sons  of  Rahu.  Their 
effects  have  been  stated 'in  the  Chapter  on  the  Sun  (vide 
stanza  7.  Ch.3.) 

23.  The  Comets  that  resemble  the  flaming  fire  or  a gar- 
land are  120  in  number.  They  are  the  sons  of  Agai  and  are 
Teamed  Visvarupa  Ketus.  When  they  appear  there  will  be 
fear  from  fire. 


24.  The  Comets  that  are  dark-red  in  color,  without  disc, 
presenting  the  appearance  of  Chamara^  and  with  scattered 
rays  are  named  Aruna  Ketus.  They  are  the  sons  of  Vayu 
tthe  wind)  and  are  77  in  number  ; when  they  appear  mankind 
will  feel  miserable. 


25.  The  Comets  that  resemble  clusters  of  stars  are 
named  Ganaka  Ketus  ; they  are  8 in  number  and  are  the  sons 
of  Prajapati.  Those  that  are  oblongularf  in  shape,  are  204 
in  number  and  are  the  sons  of  Brahma. 


♦ Chatnara  ; the  bushy  tail  of  the  Bos  Grunniens. 
t Garga  says  triangular. 


70 


Beihat  Samhita. 


[Ch.  11 

26.  lie  Comets  tliat  resemble  clusters  of  bamboo  canes 
and  that  areas  bright  as  the  moon  are  named  Kanka  Ketus 

they  are  the  sons  of  Varuna  aud  are  32  in  number.  When 
they  appear  mankind  will  suSer  miseries. 

27,  The  Comets  that  resemble  a headless  trunk  are 
named  Kabandha  Ketus  ; they  are  the  sons  of  Yama  and 
are  96  in  number  ; and  are  without  discs  ; when  they  appear 
there  will  be  much  fear  all  over  the  Earth. 

28.  The  Comets  that  are  white  possessing  a single  disc 
are  9 in  number ; they  appear  in  the  four  corners.  Thus  we 
have  .given  an  account  of  1,000  Ketus.  W e shall  now  give  a 
few  particulars  connected  with  them. 

29.  Vasa  Ketu  is  a comet  which  lies  with  its  head 
towards  the  North ; it  is  of  large  size,  glossy,  and  appears 
in  the  west.  When  it  appears  there  will  be  immediate  * 
deaths  in  the  land  but  prosperity  in  the  end. 

30.  Hasti  Ketu  resembles  the  Vasa  Ketu;  but  if  it 
appears  of  sharp  rays,  there  will  bo  fear  in  the  land.  Sastra 
Ketu  also  resembles  the  Vasa  Ketu  but  is  glossy  and  appears 
in  the  West ; and  when  it  appears,  there  will  be  wars  and 
deaths  in  the  land. 

31.  Kapala  Ketu  is  visible  on  new-moon  days;  its 
tail  is  of  the  color  of  smoke : its  course  lies  through  the 
eastern  half  of  the  visible  hemisphere ; when  it  appears  man- 
kind will  suffer  from  hunger,  death,  drought  and  disease. 

32.  Koudra  Ketu  is  a comet  resembling  the  dagger’s 
end  and  is  of  a dull  red  color ; it  appears  f iu  the  South-East 
and  travels  through  a third  of  the  sky  and  produces  the  same 
effects  as  the  Kapala  Ketu. 

33.  Chala  Ketu  is  a comet  which  appears  in  the  West 
with  a tail  an  inch  in  length  pointing  to  the  South;  as  it  pro- 
ceeds more  and  more  towards  the  North,  it  increases  in  length. 


* On  the  day  of  appearance  according  to  commentator, 
f Abont  the  constellation  of  Ashadha  according  to  commentator 


Brihai  Samhita. 


71 


Ch.  11] 

34*  After  toucliing  the  Ursa  Major  or  tha  Pole  a^ar,  or 
the  constellation  of  Abhijit^  it  turns  back  and  after  travelling 
one  half  of  the  sky  disappears  in  the  South. 

35.  When  this  Ketu  appears,  the  country  between 
Allahabad  and  Oojeio,  the  forests  near  Ajmere,  the  north,  the 
country  of  Devika  and  Madhyadesa  will  perish. 

3G.  The  other  countries  will  also  suSer  in  several  places 
from  disease  and  from;  famine;  the  effects  described  will  last 
for  10  months  according  to  some  and  for  18  months  according 
to  others  (t)« 

37.  Sweta  Ketu  is  a comet  which  appears  in  the  East 
about  midnight  with  its  tail  pointing  to  the  South.  Ka  Ketu 
is  a comet  of  the  shape  of  a carriage  pole  and  appears  in  the 
West.  Both  the  above  Ketus  are  seen  simultaneously 
for  7 days. 

38.  If  both  should  appear  glossy,  there  will  be  pros- 
perity and  happiness  in  the  land;  if  the  Ka  Ketu  should  ba 
visible  for  over  7 days,  there  will  be  much  suffering  from  wars 
for  ten  years. 

39.  The  Sweta  Ketu  is  of  the^  shape  of  the  twisted  hair 

and  of  a dull  and  disagreeable  aspect;  it  tr’avels  ^through  a 
third  of  the  sky  and  then  retraces  its  steps.  When  it  disap- 
pears it  leaves  only  a third  of  mankind  as  survivors. 

40.  Rasmi  Ketu  is  a comet  possessing  a tail  slightly 
colored  like  smoke;  it  appears  in  the  constellation  of  Kritika. 

The  effects  are  the  same  as  those  assigned  to  Sweta  Ketu. 

41.  Dhruva  Ketu  is  a comet  possessing  no  fixed  course^ 
color  or  shape  and  appears  anywhere  in  the  heavens,  in  the  sky 
and  on  Earth.  When  it  appears  glossy,  mankind  will  be  happy 


f For  8 years  according  to  Parasara  and  Garga. 


72 


Beihat  Samhita. 


[Ch.  11 

42.  To  those  whose  death  might  be  near  this  Ketu  appears 
in  the  several  divisions  of  the  King’s  army^  in  houses, in  trees, 
in  hills  and  in  house  hold  utensils. [* * * * §] 

43.  Kumada  Ketu  is  a comet  of  the  color  of  the  white 

water  lily.  It  appears  in  the  west  with  its  tail  pointing  to  the 
east  and  is  visible  only  for  a night.  When  it  appears  there 

will  be  unprecedented  happiness  in  the  land  for  a period  of 

ten  years,  ft) 

44.  Mani  Ketu  is  a comet  which  appears  for  only  3 hours 
occasionally;  it  possesses  an  invisible  disc  and  appears  in  the 
West  ; its  tail  is  straight  and  white  and  it  resembles  a line  of 
milk  drawn  from  a human  breast.({) 

45.  There  will^be  happiness  in  the  land  from  the  very 
lime  of  its  appearance  for  four  and  a half  months;  reptiles  and 
venomous  creatures  will  come  into  existence  (§) 

46.  Jala  Ketu  is  a comet  which  appears  in  the  west 
with  a raised  fail;  it  is  glossy,  when  it  appears  there  will  be 

prosperity  in  the  land  for  9 months,  and  the  world  will  be  freed 
from  all  miseries. 

47.  Bhava  Ketu  is  a comet  visible  only  for  a singlo 

night  and  in  the  East,  possessing  a small  disc;  it  is  glossy; 
the  tail  is  bent  like  that  of  a lion. 

48.  There  will  be  unprecedented  happiness  in  the  land 
for  as  many  months  as  the  number  of  hours  for  which  it  con- 
tinues to  be  visible;  if  it  should  be  fearful  to  look  at  fatal 

diseases  will  afflict  mankind. 

~ - -I-  — 1 - — I 

* According  to  Parasara  it  is  seen  in  trees,  mountains, bamboos,  China 
rose,  reads,  implements  of  war,  jewels,  chariots,  elephants,  camels,  beds 
seats,  vessels  and  the  like.  The  number  of  these  Ketus  is  10, 21, 60,  or  100 
in  the  opinion  of  several  writers. 

t Vridha  Garga  says  that  this  happiness  cannot  be  an  nnmixed  one; 
according  to  him,  cometary  appearances  never  fail  to  produce  evils, 

^ This  and  several  other  comets  can  be  very  well  identified  by  a look 
Into  the  Map  of  comets  published  by  Europeans. 

§ According  to  Parasara  if  the  comet  continues  to  be  TiiiM®  for  «v#r 
3 hours  serpents,  mongooses  and  the  like  will  come  into  extitenoe, 


CH-  11-] 


BPJHAT  SAM  HIT  A. 


73 


49.  Pixdma  Ketii  is  a comet  white  like  the  stem  of  the 
lotus.  If  it  appear  only  for  a night  there  will  be  joy  and 
happiness  in  the  land  for  7 years. 

50.  Avarta  Ketu  is  a comet  of  a red  color  ; it  appears  in 
the  West  at  mid-night  with  its  tail  pointing  to  the  South  and 
it  is  glossy.  There  will  be  happiness  in  the  land  for  as  many 
months  as  the  number  of  Kshanas  (Four  minutes)  for  which  it 
continues  to  be  visible. 

V 

51.  Samvarta  Ketu  is  a cornet  which  appears  in  the  West 
in  the  evening  with  a tail  of  the  color  of  smoke  and  copper, 
extending  to  a third  af  the  sky  and  resembling  the  sharp  end 
of  a dagger  5 it  is  fearful  to  look  at. 

52.  Princes  will  suffer  in  wars  for  as  many  years  as  the 
number  of  hours  for  which  it  continues  to  be  visible.  Those 
persons  will  also  suffer  in  the  star  of  whose  nativity  the  comet 
appears. 

53.  Omitting  the  benefic  comets,  we  shall  proceed  to  state 
the  several  princes  who  will  perish  according  as  the  malefic 
comets  either  dim  with  their  tails  the  stars  of  the  various  con- 
stellations or  appear  to  be  in  contact  with  the  same. 

54.  If  the  stars  of  the  constellation  of  Asviui  should  be 
dimmed  by  the  tails  of  or  appear  to  be  in  contact  with,  malefic 
comets  the  ruler  of  Asmaka*  will  perish  j if  the  stars  of  Bha- 
rani  should  be  so  dimmed  or  in  contact  with  malefic  comets, 
the  ruler  of  Kiratas  will  perish  ; if  those  of  Krittika,  the  ruler 
of  Kalinga  will  perish  ; if  those  of  Kohini,  the  ruler  of  Sura- 
sena  will  perish. 

55.  If  the  stars  of  the  constellation  of  Mriga  Seersha 
should  be  dimmed  by  the  tails  of  or  appear  to  be  in  contact 
with  malefic  comets,  the  ruler  of  Aseenara  will  perish  ; if 


* Most  of  these  countries  have  been  already  explained.  The  rest  wherever 
they  can  be  identified;  will  be  explained  as  we  proceed. 


10 


74 


BUIHAT  samiiita 


[CH.  11. 


those  of  Ardra,  the  ruler  of  the  people  subsisting  by  the  pro- 
ducts of  water  will  perish  ; if  those  of  Punaiwasu  the  ruler  of 
Asmaka  will  perish  ; and  if  those  of  Pushja  the  ruler  of  Magada 
will  perish. 


56.  If  the  stars  of  the  constellation  of  Asiesha  should  be 
dimmed  by  the  tails  of  or  appear  to  be  in  contact  with  malefic 
comets,  the  ruler  of  Asika  will  perish  ; if  those  of  Magha,  the 
ruler  of  Anga  will  perish  ; if  those  of  Poorvaphalguni,  the  ruler 
of  Pandya  will  perish  ; if  those  of  U ttaraphalguui,  the  ruler  of 
Oojein  will  perish  ; and  if  those  of  Hasta,  the  ruler  of  Dan- 
daka*  will  perish* 

57.  If  the  stars  of  the  constellation  of  Chittra  should  be 
dimmed  by  the  tails  of  or  appear  to  be  in  contact  with  malefic 
comets,  the  ruler  of  the  Kurus  will  perish  ; if  those  of  Swati, 
the  rulers  of  Cashmere  and  Camboja  will  perish. 

58.  If  the  stars  of  the  constellation  of  Visakha  should  be 
dimmed  by  the  tails  of  or  appear  to  be  in  contact  with, 
malefic  comets,  the  ruler  of  Ikshwaku  and  of  Alaka  will  perish  ; 
if  those  of  Anuradha,  the  ruler  of  Pundra  will  perish  ; if  those 
of  Jyeshta  the  chief  emperor  will  suffer. 


59.  If  the  stars  of  the  constellation  of  Mula  should  bo 
dimmed  by  the  tails  of  or  appear  to  be  in  contact  with,  malefic 
comets,  the  rulers  of  Andhra  and  of  Mathra  will  perish  ; if 

a 

those  of  Poorvashadha,  the  ruler  of  Benares  will  perish  j if  those 
of  Uttarashadha,  the  rulers  of  Youdheyaka,  of  Arjunayana,  of 
Sivi  and  of  Chaitya  will  perish. 


60.  If  the  stars  of  the  constellation  of  Sravana  should 
be  dimmed  by  the  tails  of  or  appear  to  be  in  contact  with,  the 
malefic  comets,  the  ruler  of  Kekaya  will  perish  ; if  those  of 
Dhanishta,  tlie  ruler  of  Punjab  will  perish  ; if  those  of  Sataya 


^ Dandaka  : name  of  a district  in  the  Deldian  between  the  Nermada  and 
Godaveri  rivers  which  in  the  time  of  Ramachendra  was  a forest  and  celebrated  as  a 
place  of  pilgrimage, 


CII.  11.] 


BRIHAT  SAMIIITA. 


75 


t}ie  ruler  of  Ceylon  will  perish  ; if  those  of  Poorvabhadra;  the 
ruler  of  Bengal  will  perish  ; if  those  of  Uctarabhadra,  the  ruler 
of  Naimisha  will  perish  ; aud  if  those  of  Kevati,  the  ruler  of 
Kirata  will  perish. 

61.  If  the  tails  of-  the  comets  should  be  crossed  by  the 
fall  of  meteors  there  will  be  happiness  in  the  land  ; if  there 
should  be  a fall  of  raiu'at  the  time  of  the  appearance  of  a comet 
mankind  will  be  exceedingly  happy  ; but  the  people  of  Chola 
and  of  Avagana  as  well  as  the  white-meu;  the  infidels  and  the 
Chinese  vvill  suffer. 

62.  The  ru  lers  of  the  countries  to  which  the  bent  tails  of 
the  comets  pointy,  of  the  countries  in  the  direction  of  which  the 
tails  of  the  comets  extend  and  of  the  countries  corresponding 
to  the  several  constellations  (as  described  above)  with  whose 
stars  the  comets  might  appear  to  be  in  contact,  will  triumph 
over  their  enemies  and  be  happ}". 


Note  : — Compare,  with  the  above,  what  modern  science 
has  to  say  on  the  subject  of  comets  : 

What  then  is  a comet  according  to  the  latest  scientific 
researches  ? The  spectroscope  has  pretty  well  solved  the 
query.  It  consists,  first,  of  a more  or  less  solid  nucleus  on  fire, 
blazing  and  glowing  j second,  of  vast  masses  of  incandescent 
gas,  constituting  the  luminous  head  ; third,  solid  materials, 
constituting  the  tail,  which  are  ponderable,  which  reflect  the 
Sun’s  light  and  are  carried  along  by  the  influence  of  the 
nucleus  ; fourth,  an  immense  prolongation  of  the  tail  in  the 
nature  of  attenuated  volumes  of  gas.  fidie  solid  materials  of  a 
comet,  it  is  believed,  consist  of  stones  and  sand,  particles 
ground  by  ceaseless  attrition.  The  proof  of  this  is  the  con- 
cession  of  most  astronomers  that  meteoric  showers  are  shreds 
and  patches  of  cometic  matter,  dropped  from  the  tail,  and 
these  meteors  are  stones,  fl’lie  genesis  of  cornets  is  found  to 


BRJHAT  SAMHITA. 


76 


[CH.  12. 


be  in  the  explosion  of  planetary  bodies,  a theory  not  without 
good  scientific  authority.^^ 

Arago  estimates  that  there  are  17,000,000  of  these  fiery 
wanderers  within  the  orbit  of  Neptune,  and  Lambert  regards 
500,000,000  as  a moderate  estimate  for  those  in  the  Solar 
System*  All  the  astronomers  agree  that  they  are  scattered 
through  space  as  profusely  as  the  fish  in  the  seas.  The  Orbit 
of  the  Earth  is  over-whelmed  in  a fine  net-work  of  cornetary 
orbits,  and  our  globe  is  like  a lost  child  in  a forest  full  of  wild 
beasts.’^ 


CHAPTER  XII. 

On  Canopus.* 

1.  The  mighty  ocean  whose  waters,  were  swallowed  by 
Agastya,  exhibited  gems  that  eclipsed  the  splendor  of  the 
crowns  of  the  Devas  and  rocks  broken  by  the  action  of'  the 
sharks  on  them  and  thus  presented  an  appearance  beautiful, 
though  without  water. 

2.  It  also  exhibited  hills  with  trees,  corals  and  gems  and 
the  scene  was  rendered  picturesque  by  serpents  that  issued 
from  the  rocks. 

3.  It  exhibited  whales,  water  elephants  and  rivers  and 
gems  scattered  over  its  bed,  and,  though  deprived  of  water, 
presented  an  appearance  splendid  as  Devaloka. 

4*  There  were  also  seen,  moving  to  and  fro,  whales, 
pearl  oysters  and  conch  shells,  and  the  som  altogether  looked 
like  a summer  lake  with  its  moving  waves,  water  lilies  and 
Swans. 

* Canopus  : Tins  star  is  sacred  to  Agastya  who  is  said  to  have  drunk 
off  the  ocean  and  suppressed  the  heights  of  the  Vindaya  mountains.  The  first 
5 stanzas,  curiously  enough,  are  devoted  to  a description  of  the  beauties  of  the 
sea  on  the  occasion  of  the  former  feat,  and  the  6th  stanza  which  is  written  in 
Dandaka  metre  is  devoted  to  a description  of  the  beauties  of  the  Vindaya 
mountains  on  the  occasion  of  the  latter  feat.  The  language  is  highly 
rhetorical. 


cii.  12.] 


BRIHAT  SAMIIITA. 


77 

5.  Its  liufje  wliite  waves  looked  like  clouds  : its  crems 
looked  like  stars  ; its  crystals  looked  like  the  Moou  ; and  its 
long  bright  serpents  bearing  gems  in  their  hoods  looked  like 
comets  and  thus  the  whole  sea  looked  like  the  sky. 

6.  Hear  now  the  effects  of  the  heliacal  rising  of  Canopus^ 
a star  sacred  to  Agastya  who  suppressed  the  Vindaya  nnmn- 
tains  whose  soaring  heights  obstructed  the  course  of  the  Sun  ; 
to  which  the  pictured  robes  of  the  Vidyadhara  females  leaning 
for  support  on  their  .lord’s  arms  and  flying  aloft  in  the  sky 
formed  beautiful  flowing  flags  ; whose  caves  were  the  abodes 
of  lions  whichj,  having  druids  of  the  perfumed  blood  of  ele- 
phants in  rut  had  their  mouths  covered  with  bees  that  looked 
like  so  many  black  flowers^  and  from  which  caves  issued 
rivers;  whose  summits  appeared  to  score  the  starry  vault; 
whose  rocks  were  full  of  buzzing  bees  scared  by  the  violent 
pulling  of  flower  trees  by  wild  elephants  and  were  also  the 
abodes  of  hyenas,  of  bears,  of  tigers  and  of  monkeys  ; through 
which  lay  the  secret  course  of  the  Kavi  which  appeared  to  em- 
brace its  bosom  with  the  affection  of  a mistress  ; and  in  whose 
forests  dwelt  the  Devas  and  also  Brahmin  recluses,  some  sub- 
sisting on  water,  some  on  roots,  some  on  the  air  and  some 
altogether  without  food. 

7.  When  star  Canopus  reappears  after  its  conjunction 
with  the  Sun,  waters  muddled  by  their  contact  with  the  earth 
will  resume  their  original  clearness  just  in  the  same  way  as 
the  minds  of  the  Sadhus  naturally  recover  their  original  purity 
after  contact  with  the  wicked.* 

8.  The  autumn  is  attended  by  the  Chakravaka  *}*  on  both 
its  sides  (i.  e.,  beginning  and  end)  ; in  it  is  heard  the  music  of 
the  swan  ; and  its  opening  is  marked  by  the  beautiful  red  sky  ; 


* The  rhetorical  beauty  in  this  stanza  consists  in  a certain  Slesha  (double 
meaning)  contained  in  the  terra  Ku  Samayoga,  whicli  means  both  contact  with  the 
earth  and  contact  with  the  wicked. 

The  next  three  stanzas  describe  the  beauties  of  the  autumn  which  commences 
with  the  reappearance  of  Canopus. 

t Chakravaka  : the  ruddy  goose  commonly  called  the  Brahmani  duck. 


BRIIJAT  SAMHITA* 


[CH.  12. 


ill  all  these  respects  the  season  resembles  a woman  with  a ris- 
ing bosom,  sounding  jewels  and  betel  colored  mouth. 

9.  Again  in  the  season  of  autumn  will  be  found  the  blue 
and  white  lotus  growing  side  by  side,  hovered  over  by  beauti- 
ful hues  of  bees,  tender  creepers  adding  beauty  to  the  scene  ; 
the  season  therefore  resembles  a charming  woman  with  blue 
eyes,  fair  face,  black  hair  and  thin  brows. 

10‘  As  if  to  view  the  beauty  of  the  pure  disc  of  her  lord 
the  Moon,  the  summer  lake  opens  at  night  her  red  lotus  buds 
— her  eyes — of  soft  petals  in  which  lie  concealed  the  black  bee 
serving  as  the  pupil  of  the  eye. 

11.  The  Earth,  by  means  of  her  arms,  the  waves,  adorn- 
ed by  the  lotus,  the  Swan,  the  ruddy  goose  and  the  water- 
crow  appears  to  welcome  the  appearance  of  Agastya  with  her 
offerings  of  gems,  abundant  flowers  and  fruits. 

12.  The  poisonous  and  hot  waters  poured  down  by  cloud- 
covered  serpents  by  order  of  Indra  become  pure  and  fit, for  use 
on  the  reappearance  of  the  Star  Canopus* 

13*  The  very  thought  (meditation)  of  the  sage  Agastya 
is  calculated  to  wash  off  one’s  sins  ; his  praise  (worship)  must 
be  capable  of  doing  more.  For  the  benefit,  therefore,  of 
princes,*  I will  now  speak  of  the  rules  of  the  Argliya  (offering) 
to  be  presented  to  Agastya  as  stated  by  the  Rishis. 

14.  The  time  of  reappearance  of  the  Star  Canopus  is 
different  in  different  places;  and  it  is  for  the  learned  Astrono- 
mer to  ascertain  these  times  for  given  places.  In  the  Town  of 
Oojien  the  star  reappears  when  the  sun  just  begins  to  enter 
the  24th  degree  of  the  sign  Leo*t 


* The  commentatoi’  adds  that  this  offei'ing  is  equally  binding  on  all  men,  and. 
forms  part  of  man’s  Nityakarma.  In  Vishnu  Rahasya  we  find  Vishnu  addressing 
Agastya  as  follows  : he  who  fails  to  worship  thee  by  the  offering  of  Arghya  shall 
lose  in  your  favor  the  effects  of  a year’s  Punnyalcarma ; he  who  worships  thee 
shall  enioy  wealth  and  prosperity  in  Sweta  Dwipa  (Vaikuntha.) 

t Leo  : The  word  in  the  text  is  Agatasya  Kanyam,  which  literally  means  be- 
fore the  Sun  enters  the  sign  of  Virgo,  but  which  the  commentator  takes  to  mean 
being  in  Leo.  Vide  note  to  stan?.a  21. 


cii.  12.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


79 


15.  When  the  darkness  of  the  niglit  should  just  begin  to 
be  broken  by  streaks  of  red  light  from  the  eastern  horizon, 
princes,  previously  prepared*  for  the  purpose,  ought  to 
offer  their  Argliijam.  to  Agastya  by  pouring  it  on  tlie  earth  in 
the  direction  of  the  Star  Canopus  rising  in  the  South  East  as 
will  be  pointed  out  by  the  Astronomer. 

16.  The  offering*  to  be  made  by  princes  in  honor  of 

Agastya  shall  consist  of  the  fragrant  flowers  of  the  season, 

of  fruits,  of  precious  stones,  of  gold  cloths,  of  cows,  of  bulls, 

of  well  cooked  rice,  of  sweet-meats,  of  curdled  milk,  of  colored 

rice,  of  perfumed  smoke  and  fragrant  paste. 

* 

17.  A prince  making  this  (offering,  with  a truly  devout 
spirit,  on  every  occasion  of  the  reappearance  of  the  btar 
Canopus  for  7 years  will  be  freed  from  disease,  will  triumph 
over  his  enemies,  and  will  become  the  Sole  ruler  of  the  Earth. 

18.  A Brahmin  making  this  offering  to  the  extent  of  his 
ability  will  become  learned  in  the  Vedas  and  will  be  blessed 
with  a wife  and  children  ; a Vaisia  doing  the  same  will  get 
cows;  and  a Sudra  doing  it  will  get  wealth,  and  all  the  four 
will  be  freed  from  disease  and  become  virtuous. f 

19.  If  the  disc  of  the  Star  Canopus  should  present  a dis- 
agreeable appearance,  there  will  be  disease  in  the  land;  if 
yellow,  there  will  be  drought;  if  of  the  color  of  smoke,  cows 
will  suffer;  if  of  unsteady  light,  mankind  will  be  afflicted  with 
fears;  if  white  red,  they  will  suffer  from  hunger  and  from  star- 
vation ; and  if  of  very  small  disc,  the  chief  Towns  will  be  sur- 
rounded by  the  enemy. 

Previously  prepared  : by  fasting  and  performance  of  Agastya  pooja,  accord- 
ing to  commentator. 

+ According  to  Matsyapurana,  the  offering  must  be  made  7 times  on  some 
one  morning  before  dawn  witbin  7 days  from  the  reappearance  of  Canopus. 
According  to  some  other  authority  the  offering  should  be  continued  for  17  years, 
and  must  be  accompanied  in  the  case  of  the  first  three  classes  of  men  by  tlie 
singing  of  Vedic  hymns.  For  a detailed  account  of  the  ritual  connected  with 
the  ceremony  the  reader  is  referred  to  Bhavisbyapurana  and  to  a work  entitled 
Danamala. 


80 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[cn.  13* 


20.  If  Canopus  should  appear  of  tlie  color  of  silver  or 
crystal,  or  brilliant,  there  will  be  prosperity  in  the  laud,  and 
mankind  will  be  free  from  fear  and  disease. 

21.  If  Canopus  should  be  crossed  by  metoric  falls  or  by 
comets  mankind  will  suffer  from  huno^er  a!id  death.  When 
the  sun  enters  the  constellation  of  Hasta,  Canopus  reap- 
pears, and  when  he  enters  the  constellation  of  Rohini,  Canopus 
disappears.* 


CHAPTER  XIIL 
On  the  Ursa  Major, 

OR 

The  Constellation  of  Sapta  Rishis. 

1.  The  Seven  Rishis  form  as  it  were  a garland  of  the 
white  lotus  to  lady  North  or  look  like  her  smile  or  seem  to  be 
her  lords. 

2*  Or  by  the  direction  of  her  lord  the  Pole  star,  lady 
North,  appears  to  dance  round  as  the  Seven  Rishis  move  in 
their  course.  I begin  to  treat  of  these  stars  adopting  the 
views  of  Vridha  Garga. 

3.  During  the  reign  of  Yudhishtiraf  2526+  years  be- 

* The  statement  in  the  text  amounts  to  this : Canopus  reappears  when  the 
sun  enters  the  17th  degree  of  the  sign  Virgo,  and  disappears  when  the  suu 
enters  the  nth  degree  of  the  sign  Taurus.  This  the  commentator  says  cannot 
be  ordinarily,  and  is  besides  opposed  to  what  has  been  stated  in  stanza  14th. 
According  to  commentator  the  author  has  quoted  in  the  last  stanza  the  opinion 
of  Parasara  which  is  only  an  instance  of  Utpata.  It  cannot  be  otherwise  ; for 
Canopus  is  situated  at  the  end  of  the  sign  Gemini  which  is  70®  from  Hasta 
and  only  50  ® from  Rohini: — 

According  to  some  Canopus  reappears  on  the  8th  lunar  day  or  on  new-moon* 
day  of  the  waning  moon  of  the  month  of  Asvayuk  (Tula  and  Vrischika),  This  is 
opposed  to  actual  observation  and  must  be  regarded  as  Utpata. 

Again  in  Vishnu  Rahasya  Vachana  it  is  stated  that  Canopus  reappears  when 
the  Sun  enters  Hasta;  but  this  as  well  as  what  Brihaspati  says,  the  commentator 
regards  as  being  true  for  the  Northern  countries. 

t Yudhislitira,  otherwise  known  as  Dharniaputra,  the  eldest  of  the  Pandus 
who  flourished  at  the  end  of  the  Dvaparayuga. 

J 2526,  i.  e.  nearly  4,500  years  ago.  The  reader  will  note  that  at  this  early 
period  at  least,  if  not  earlier  still,  the  Hindus  were  noted  for  their  knowledge  of 
Astronomy  and  that  they  had  recognized  the  motions  of  the  stars,  speaks  highly 
of  their  powers  of  observation. 


cif.  13  •] 


BRIHAT  SAMIIITA. 


81 


fore  the  commencement  of  Vikrama  Saka  the  Seven  Rishis 
were  at  the  constellation  of  Magha  (Regulus).* * * § 

4.  The  Rishis  take  a period  of  100  years  to  go  over  each 
of  the  27  Asterisms*  f They  rise  in  the  North-East  and 
are  accompanied  by  tlie  chaste  Arandhati^  the  consort  of 

Vasishtha4 

5‘  The  eastern-most  of  the  group  is  Bhagavan  Marichi  ; 
the  next  to  him  is  Vasishtha  ; the  next  is  Angirasa  and  the 
next  two  are  Atri  andT^ulastya. 

6.  The  next  in  order  are  the  Risliis  Pulaha  and  Kritu* 
The  chaste  Arundhati,  closely  attends  her  husband  the  sage 
Vasishtha-§ 

7*  If  the  Rishis  should  be  crossed  by  meteoric  falls, 
thunderbolts,  or  comets,  or  if  they  should  appear  dim  or  with- 
out rays  or  of  very  small  disc,  they  will  cause  misery  and 
suffering  to  the  persons  and  objects  they  severally  represent ; 
but  if  they  should  appear  big  or  bright  there  will  be  happiness 
and  prosperity. 

8.  If  Marichi  should  be  affected  as  described  above  the 
Gandharvas,  the  Devas,  the  Asuras,  skilled  magicians  and 
physicians,  the  Yakshas,  the  Nagas  and  the  Vidyadharas  will 
also  be  afflicted. 

9.  If  Vasishtha  should  be  crossed  by  meteoric  falls  or 
otherwise  affected,  the  Scythians,  the  Yavanas,  the  Daradas, 

* Regulus  : vide  last  note  to  the  next  stanza. 

f An  Asterism  is  13^  . 20’  of  the  ecliptic  : at  the  rate  of  100  years  each  the 
Rishis  take  2,700  years  to  make  a circuit  of  the  heavens. 

J The  Rishis  are  said  to  he  iu  that  constellation  of  the  ecliptic  with  which  the 
western  most  two  either  rise  at  Lanka  (equator)  or  culminate  at  the  meridian.  In 
Vishuu  Purana  it  is  stated  that  when  the  observation  was  made  at  one  time,  the 
two  Rishis  were  found  in  Magha.  The  Purana  also  states  that  when  the  Rishis 
should  reach  the  constellation  of  Poorvashada  passing  over  a space  of  10  asterisms 
in  1015  years  the  Nandas  will  reign. 

§ Vasishtha,  as  already  observed,  is  the  last  star  but  one.  What  is 
pointed  out  as  Arundhati  near  Vasishtha  is  not  the  real  Arundhati ; she  is 
declared  in  the  Sastras  to  be  a Sookshma  Tara  (Telescopic  star)  very  close  to 
Vasishtha. 


11 


82 


BRIIIAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  14. 


the  Paratap,  the  people  of  Camboja  and  the  Rishis  of  the 
forests  will  suffer  ; but  if  Vasishtha  should  appear  bright,  he 
will  cause  happiness. 

10.  If  Angiras  should  be  affected  as  described  above, 
men  of  knowledge,  men  of  acute  intellect  and  the  Brahmins 
will  be  afflicted  ; if  Atri  should  be  so  affected  the  products  of 
the  forests  and  of  water,  seas  and  rivers  will  suffer- 

11.  Along  with  Pulastya  will  suffer  the  Rakshasas,  the 
Pisachas,  the  Asuras,  the  Deityas  and  the  Nagas.  Along  with 
Pulaha  will  suffer  roots  and  fruits,  and  along  with  Kritu  will 
suffer  sacrificial  rites  and  persons  performing  them- 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

On  Kurma  Vibhaga.* 

1.  The  countries  of  the  Earth  beginning  from  the  centre 

of  Bharata  Varsha  and  going  round — the  East,  South  East, 

South,  &c., are  divided  into  9 divisions  corresponding 

to  the  27  lunar  asterisras  at  the  rate  of  3 for  each  division 
and  beginning  from  Krittika. 

2-  The  Constellations  of  Krittika,  Rohini  and  Mriga- 
seersha  represent  the  Madhyadesa  or  central  division  consist- 
ing of  the  countries  of  Bhadra,  Arimeda,  Mandavya,  Salwa, 
Neepa,  Ujjihana,  Maru,  Vatsa,  Ghosha,  the  countries  border- 
ing on  the  Jumna  and  the  Sarswati,  the  countries  of  Matsya, 
Madhyamika* 

3«  Madhuraka,  Upajyotishaka,  Dharmarani,  Suraseua, 
Gouragreeva,  Uddebika,  Panda,  Guda,  Asvattha,  Panchala. 

* Kurma  Vibhaga  : The  geographical  divisions  of  the  Earth  and  of  India  par- 
ticularly, corresponding  to  the  various  stellar  divisions  along  the  ecliptic.  The 
object  is  to  discover  vrhich  of  the  countries  of  the  earth  will  suffer  when  plane- 
tary and  the  like  celestial  phenomena  occur.  The  Chapter  therefore  is  a useful 
one,  though  it  may  not  be  found  to  be  interesting  study  to  the  general  reader. 
It  may  be  used  as  a geographical  dictionary  of  reference  when  necessary.  A few 
more  geographical  terms  occur  in  Chapters  XVI  and  XVII.  For  convenience  of 
reference  it  is  proposed  to  give  an  alphabetical  list  of  the  more  important  terms 
occuring  in  the  three  Chapters  at  the  end  of  Chapter  XVII  with  the  modern  names 
given  opposite  to  each. 


CH.  14.] 


BlilHAT  SAMHITA. 


83 


4*  Saketa^  Kanku,  Kurn,  Kalakoti^  Kakura_,  the  Pariyatra 
mountains,  Oudumbara,  Kapisbthala,  Gajahvaya. 

5.  The  constellations  of  Ardra,  Punarvasu  and  Pushya 
represent  the  Eastern  division  consisting  of  the  mountains  of 
Aiijana,  of  Vrishabha,  of.  Dhvaja,  of  Padma,  and  of  Malyavari 
the  countries  of  Vyaghramukha,  Suhma,  Karvata,  Chan- 
drapura,  Soorpakarna.  ’ 

6.  Khasa,  Magada,  Sibiragiri,  Mithila,  Saraatata,  Udra, 
Asvavadana,  Danturaka,  and  farther-east  Jyotisha,  Louhitya, 
Kshirasamudra,  the  land  of  the  Canibals. 

7.  The  Eastern  Ghauts,  the  countries  of  Bhadragondaka, 
Poundra,  Utkala,  Kasee,  Mekala,  Urabashta,  Yekapada, 
Tamraliptika,  Kosalaka  and  Vardhamana. 

8.  The  constellations  of  Aslesha,  Magha  and  Poorva- 
phalguni  represent  the  South  Eastern  division  consisting  of 
the  countries  of  Kosala,  Kalinga,  Vanga,  Upavanga,  Jataranga, 
Soulika,  Vidarbha,  Vatsa,  Andhra,  Chedika,  Oordhvakantha- 

9.  The  islands  of  Vrisha,  of  Nalikera  and  of  Charma; 
the  countries  of  Vidarbharaga  and  other  • countries  in  the 
Vindaya  mountains,  of  Tripuri,  Smasrudhara,  Hemakuta, 
Vyalagriva,  Mahagriva, 

10.-  Kishkindha,  Kantakasthala,  Nisahda,  Purika,  Dasarna, 
Nagna,  Parna  and  Sahara. 

11.  The  constellations  of  Uttaraphalguni,  Hasta  and 
Chitra  represent  the  Southern  division  consisting  of  the  coun- 
tries of  Ceylon,  Kalanjana,  Sourikirna,  Talikata,  the  moun- 
tains of  Giri,  Nagara,  Malaya,  Dardura,  Mahendra  and 
Malinya  and  the  countries  of  Broach, 

12.  Kankata,  Tankana,  Vanavasi,  Sibika,  Phanikara, 
Konkana,  Abhira,  Akara,  the  river  Vena,  the  countries  of 
Avanti,  Dasapura,  Gonarda,  Kerala, 

13.  And  Carnata  ; the  forest  of  Mahatavi^  the  mountain 
of  Chitrakuta,  the  countries  of  Nasikya,  Kolia,  Giri,  Chola, 


84  BRIHAT  SAMHITA.  [CH.  14 

Krounchadvipa  and  Jatadhara,  the  river  Cauvery  and  the 
mountain  of  Risyamuka* 

. 14*  The  islands  of  Vyduryadvipa,  Sankhadvipa,  Mukta- 

dvipa_,  Trivaricharadvipa  and  Dharmapattanadvipa  j the  coun- 
tries of  Ganarajya,  of  Kristna^  Chellur^  the  Sika,  Surpa  and 
Kusumanaga  mountains, 

15.  The  forest  of  Tumbavaua,  the  country  of  Karmane- 
yaka_,  the  South  sea,  the  countries  of  Tapasasraraa,  Rishika, 
Kanchi,  Maruchi,  Pattana,  Cherya,  Arya,  Simhala,  Rishabha, 

16.  The  Town  of  Baladeva,  the  forest  of  Dandaka^  the 
countries  of  Timingilasana,  Bhadra,  Kachha,  Kunjaradhari 
and  Tararaparni. 

17»  The  constellations  of  Swati,  Visakha  and  Anuradha 
represent  the  South-Western  division  consisting  of  the  coun- 
tries of  Palhava,  Caraboja,  Sindh,  Souvira^  Badavamukha, 
Arava,  Ambashtha,  Kapila,  Narimukha,  Anarta, 

18.  Phenagiri,  Yavana,  Makara,  Karnapraveya,  Para- 
saka,  Sudra,  Barbara,  Kirata,  Khanda,  Kravya,  Asia,  Abhira, 
Chanchuka, 

19.  Hemagiri,  Sindhukalaka,  Raivataka,  Surashtra, 
Badara,  Dravida  and  Maharnava. 

20»  The  constellations  of  Jyeshta,  Mula,and  Poorvashadha 
represent  the  Western  divisions  consisting  of  the  five  moun- 
tains of  Maniman,  Meghavan,  Vanougha,  Kshurarpana  and 
Astagiri  and  the  countries  of  Aparantaka,  Santika,  Haihaya, 
Prasastadri,  Vokkana, 

21.  Punjab,  Ramabha,  Parata,  Tarakashiti,  Jringa, 
Vaisya,  Kanaka,  Saka  and  the  rude  Mlecha  countries  in  the 
west. 

22.  The  constellations  of  Uttirashadha,  Sravana,  and 
Sravishta  represent,  the  north  western  division  consisting  of 
the  countries  of  Mandavya,  Tukhara,  Talahala,  Madra,  As- 
maka,  Kuliita,  Lahada,  Strirajya,  Nrisimha,  Vacakha, 


cn.  14.] 


BBIHAT  SAMHITA 


85 


23*  The  rivers  the  Verinrnati_,  the  Palguluka  and  the 
Guruha,  and  the  countries  of  Marukuchha  and  Charmaranga 
whose  people  possess  a single  eye^  single  lock;  a long  neck, 
a long  face  and  lon^  hair. 

o n 

24.  The  constellations  of  Satabhishak,  Purva  Bhadrapada, 
Uttara  Bhadrapada  represent  the  Northern  division  consisting 
of  the  six  mountains  of  the  Kylasa,  the  Himalayas;  the  Vasu- 
man,  the  Dhanuslirnan,  the  Krouncha  and  the  Meru  and  the 
countries  of  the  North  Kurudesa;  Kshudrameena* 

25.  Kaikaya,  Yasati,  Yamuna,  Bhogaprastha,  Arjuna- 
yana,  Agnidhra,  Adarsantadvipi,  Trigarta,  Turaganana,  As- 
wamukha. 

26.  Kesadhara,  Chipita,  Nasika,  Baseraka,  Yatadhana, 
Saradhana,  Takshasila,  Pushkalavata,  Kailavata,  Kuntadhana. 

27.  Ambara,  Madraka,  Malava,  Pourava,  Kachara,  Dan- 
dapingala,  Manahala,  Huna,  Kohala,  Seetaka,  Mandavya^  Bhu- 
tapura. 

% 

28.  Gandhara,  Yasovati,  Hematala,  Rajanya,  Khachara; 
Gavya,  Youdheya;  Dasameya>  Syamaka  and  Kshemadhurta. 

29.  The  constellations  of  Revati,  Asvati  and  Bharani 
represent  the  North-Eastern  Division  consisting  of  the  coun- 
tries of  Merukanaka,  Nashtarajya,  Pasupala,  Keera,  Kasmira, 
Abhisara,  Darada,  Tangana,  Kuluta,  Sairindha,  Yanarashtra. 

80.  Brihmapura,  Darvada,  Amara,  Yanarajya,  Kirata, 
China,  Kouninda,  Bhalla,  Palola,  Jatasura,  Kunatha,  Khasha, 
Ghosha,  Kuchika, 

31.  Yekacharana,  Anuvisva,  Suvarnabhu,  Yasuvana, 
Divishta,  Pourava,  Chiranivasana;  Triuetra,  Munjadri  and 
Gandharva. 

32.  If  the  nine  divisions  of  the  27  constellations  from 
Krittika  should  suffer  from  the  presence  of  malefic  planets* 
in  them,  the  rulers  of  Panchala,  Magada,  Kalinga, 

* These  are  Satunij  the  Sun,  Mars,  Rahu  and  Kctu  according  to  commen- 
tator. 


86 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA.  [CH.  14. 

33.  Avanfcij,  Anarta,  Sindbj  Souvira,  Harahoura,  Madra 
and  Konniuda  will  respectively  suffer  miseries. 


Note. — The  following  list  is  from  Parasara. 

The  chief  mountains  are  7«  The  chief  rivers  are  40.  The 
chief  oceans  are  4.  The  number  of  smaller  rivers  flowing  into 
seas  is  6^000. 

The  chief  countries  are  99.  The  number  of  peninsulas 
is  10  ; of  Sandy  deserts  is  8 ; of  deep  lakes  80  ; of  islands  80. 
The  number  of  rivers  whoso  course  is  westwards  is  5^000. 

According  to  Vikrama  Simha  the  three  constellations 
from  Krittika  form  the  womb,  the  navel  and  the  heart  of 
lunar  Zodiac  j the  three  from  Ardra  form  the  neck,  face  and 
so  forth  going  round  as  before,  so  that  Oudh,  Mithila,  Kou- 
siki,  Gaya,  Patna,  Apichatra  as  far  as  Allahabad  are  in  the 
womb  of  the  lunar  Zodiac  ; Bengal,  Utkala,  Kalinga  and 
Magada  are  in  the  head  ; Vengi  and  Kousala  are  in  the  right 
foot  ; Simhala,  Malaya,  Kanchi  and  Kishkinda  are  in  the  right 
side;  Kashmere  is  in  the  left  side;  Kuru,  Nepala  and  China  are 
in  the  left  foot. 


CH.  14.] 


BRIIIAT  SAMHITA. 


87 


iit  « 

o 

u 

S a> 


c: 

CQ 

»-<  Cd 

QJ 

a>  ^ 
fccS 
o 

^ o 

ro 

!3  ^ 

.23 

-+2  i-H 

c3 

^ OS 

'©•-^ 

C.2 

CO 

cq  CD 

© 

© 


° o 

w 

ci  (3 

CO  O 

e+-i  P. 
© 

o 

O ES 
Co 

g.a 

a M 

•+.P  r-n 

® U-l 

■*"  S3 

C4-1  O 


© O 

a a 

.p 

.2  o 

fi 

- - © 
© 


© 

•-o 

o 


-tJ 

ce 


® o 

3 CO 

s)  lO 

4-> 

lp 

o • 


ri 

© 5 


© 

O •r'  't3 
rP  tS  'O 

M .rH 

^GO 

ffl  m 

';r  © c3 

3 

d 

fec'-H  c/2 

o 

• M Jj 

^ 'T!  vf, 

O S3  ^ 
O ' 'is 

<4-1  as  - 

o ^ 

Eh  -m 

* 


o 

o 

o 


<V 

u 

d 

a 

a 

c 

0 

u 

d 

-*-> 

01 


u 

d 


O) 

• 

o 

© 

-S3 

<4-1 

O 

© 

a 

e3 

<2; 


O 

Yc 


cc  M CO  55  ^ 02  5^*  !^*  02  02  Y-.  02  CO  CO  CO  co‘  02  55  55  55  ly:  55  !5  CO  55  15 

"i-H  O >0rfl03T}l00r^C5l>-O<3<It'>.G0l''.'— '■'^‘©■^SCOSl^COiO  i— ICOOOI^ 
C0C<l  oo  03i— Ir- IrH  l*0(MC'3^'— iCMr-l 


10  CO  so  so  O r— < O ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ CO  '—< 

f-H  I— I I— I I— 4 r— < >“4  CO  I— I SO  OQ  CO  I— I 01  I— I 


•*00  iOOcO'^(MOOi»S3t^*^05®CIO”?'^CO(MrH»OrHCS05t^COO  SO'f 
lO'^Tjir3<r-l''3'C‘14j(i— I CO  eO''^'COMCs)r-iT}1,— ICOCQ  lOiO*0 

--.OSCScOCOCOCOCMOS'^'— <®*C’C0'^r-4CC10i''?*©C'T''2'^C0i-HC0CSCiCCO 
®C0rf^0O05O>— c0C0T-4e^'M'^>0S0OQ0C5CCIC04?iQrHC'l 
^ ^HjI^r-4r-ii-H'-4r4i-H(MO3<MCq(IQ(MC<lcq(MC0C0C0C0 


S3 

_ a 

© S4 

S3  « 
O -O 
>>  © 
© 'Ti 

<4  <4 


S3 

'o 

A4 


TO 

M 

a 

to 

© 


TO 
S3 

;-4 

:3 

^ © 
CO  2 


c3 

© 


TO 

© 

Sh 

CS 

-44 

• rH 

• : 

TO  TO  TO 


{-I  ;-i 

c3  cc 

H H 


.a  M 
2 2 
© § 


© 

c3 


<S3 

>> 


M 


TO 

• ^ 

O 

© 


o ^ 


s 

o 


0)  --I  TH 


^ O 

c 


c3 


P4  a 

t- 


a 


os  03 

• ^ • rH 

C P 

o o 

• pH  • jH 

0066  m u3H36t>pq45cocooococoi-^ 


O 

o 


• • d 

be 

Cu  „ 

4J  ->-J  © 

d 

o tj)  5:1 

o c3  d 


d 

<1 

o 

d 


c3 

nu 

<i> 

a 

© 

:-i 

Ti 

-< 

cs3 

S3 

eS 


P 53' 
cc  © 

<1  P 


3 © 

3 be 
O'  03 


CD  P 

l)'2 
© .2 
P P 


-u 
00  © 


P*SJ.,>  CJCQ.<0  <4  55*43CQ.<0  S e -*<0  3vJ<0  0»e  BCQ.v3 


p 

b ■^ca 


^ 10 
^ CO 


e3 

-a 


e3 

U 

• rH 

05 

d 

bD, 


M 


© ^ 


53 

TO 

cS 

> 

54 

c3 

a 

o 


e3 

c3 

S,  “ 

OS  -S3 
p tn 


S3 

S3 

be. 


S3 
:3 

bo 

cell 

'SjP 

C3 


ce 

.if  d 


d 

rfi 

d 

C» 


d 

rrj 

d 

d 

d 


rd 

CO 

OJ 


d 

^ r" 
n35 
d 

rH 

ro 

<1 


d 

rd 

d 

^ r~] 
OT 
<: 


-w 

C3 


a 


c3 


g •- 

53  C!j 


c3 

c© 

p 

a 

p 

44 

nS 

P 


P 

'T3 

P 

a 

p 

<5 

p 


■^eCp>-^^ppW6oQt>’<i4’Sp*P<lcoc^ 


"p  m 

H-> 

d • 

02  P 


-2)  P 
P P 
> !? 
• C?  CO 

5:^5  P <i 


d 

d 

S 


r-(csicoH'»osot'.POoaccjco-4^iosot>.QOC50i— icqco'p’iosot^co 

?Hr4r4THrHprHrHiHrHC43CC|  cej  CC|  Ol  OJ  01  O? 


88 


BlilHAT  SAM  HIT  A. 


[CH.  15. 


CHAPTER  XV. 

On  the  Nakshatras* 

1.  Those  who  are  born  on  the  Janar  day  of  Krittika  will 
delight  in  white  flowers,  will  perform  sacrificial  rites,  will  be 
skilled  magicians  and  metaphysicians,  will  be  diggers,  barbers, 
Brahmans,  potters,  priests  or  astronomers-* 

2-  Those  who  are  born  on  the  Innar  day  of  Rohini  will 
be  devout  men,  merchants,  rulers,  rich  men.  Yogis,  drivers^  or 
men  possessed  of  cows,  cattle  and  the  animals  of  water,  far- 
mers and  men  possessed  of  wealth  deriv.ed  from  mountain 
produce* 

3.  Those  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  Mrigasira 
will  delight  or  deal  in  perfumes^  dress,  pearls,  flowers,  fruits, 
precious  stones,  wild  beasts,  birds  and  deer ; wilj  be  Somayajis 
or  singers;  will  be  lascivious ; will  be  good  writers  or  pain- 
ters. 

4.  Those  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  Ardra  will 
delight  in  killing,  torturing,  lying,  in  adultery,  thieving,  cheat- 
ing and  tale-bearing  ; will  deal  in  pod-grains,  black  magic, 
sorcery  and  exorcism. 

5.  Those  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  Punarvas.u 
will  be  noted  for  truthfulness,  generosity,  cleanliness,  respect- 
able descent,  personal  beauty,  sense,  fame  and  wealth  ;;  they 
will  also  be  merchants,  dealing  in  excellent  articles,  will  be 
fond  of  service  and  will  delight  in  the  company  of  painters 
and  sculptors. 

6.  Those  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  Pushya  will 
be  dealers  in  barley,  wheat,  rice,  sugar-canes  and  in  the  produce 
of  the  forest  ; will  be  either  ministers  or  rulers  ; will  live  by 
water  ; will  be  Sadhus  and  wdll  delight  in  sacrificial  rites. 


* Of  course  one  and  the  same  person  cannot  be  all  these  ; though  several 
characters  might  belong  to  him. 


cii.  15.] 


BRIIIAT  SAMHITA* 


89 


7.  Those  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  Aalesha^  will 
be  dealers  in  perfumes,  roots,  fruits,  reptiles,  serpents  and 
poison ; will  dehhj^ht  in  cheating  others  of  their  property ; 
will  be  dealers  in  pod  grains;  and  will  be  skilled  in  medicine 
of  ev’’ery  sort- 

8-  Those  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  Magha  will 
be  possessed  of  wealth,  grains  and  store  houses  ; will  delight 
in  frequenting  hills  and  in  the  performance  of  religious  rites  ; 
will  be  merchants  ; wjll  be  valient  ; will  take  animal  food  and 
will  be  female  haters. 

9.  Those  who  arp  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  P.  l^halguni 
will  delight  in  dance,  in  young  women,  in  music,  in  painting, 
in  sculpture  and  in  trade  ; will  be  dealers  in  cotton,  salt,  honey 
and  oil  and  will  be  for  ever  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  vigor  of 
youth- 

10.  Those  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  U.  Phalguni 
w'ill  be  mild,  cleanly,  modest,  heretical,  generous  and  learned  ; 
will  be  dealers  in  grains  ; will  be  wealthy,  virtuous  and  in  the 
company  of  princes- 

11.  Those  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  Hasta  will 
be  thieves,  dealers  in  elephants,  charioteers,  chief  ministers, 
painters,  merchants  and  dealers  in  pod  grains  ; ^earned  in  the 
Sastras  and  of  bright  appearance- 

12.  Those  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  Chitra  will 
be  dealers  in  jewels,  precious  stones,  fine  cloths,  writers  and 
singers,  manufacturers  of  perfumes,  good  mathematicians,  wea- 
vers, surgeons,  oculists  and  dealers  in  Rajadhauya.* 

13.  d’hose  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  Svati  will 
delight  in  keeping  birds,  deer,  horses  ; will  be  grain  mer- 
chants ; dealers  in  beaus  ; of  weak  friendship  ; weak,  of 
abstemious  habits  and  skilled  tradesmen. 


* Rrijadhanya  ; a kind  of  rice — Panicum  Frumcntaceurn,  known  in  Tamil  as 


12 


90 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  15. 


14.  Those  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  Visakha 
will  grow  trees  yielding  red  flowers  and  red  fruits  ; be  dealers 
in  gingelly  seeds,  beans,  cotton,  black  gram  and  chick  peas 
and  worshippers  of  ludra  and  Agui. 

15.  Those  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  Anuradha 
will  be  valient  ; heads  of  parties  ; fond  of  the  company  of 
Sadhus,  keep  vehicles  and  grow  every  species  of  crop. 

16.  Those  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  Jeyshta  will  be 
valient,  of.  good  descent,  wealthy,  famous  ; disposed  to  cheat 
others  of  their  property,  fond  of  travelling,  rulers  of  provinces 
or  commanders  of  armies. 

17.  Those  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  Moola  will 
be  druggists,  heads  of  men,  dealers  in  flowers,  roots,  fruits 
and  seeds  ; will  be  rich  and  will  delight  in  garden  work* 

18.  Those  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  P.  Ashadha 
will  be  of  gentle  manners  ; fond  of  sea-voyage,  truthful,  cleanly 
and  wealthy  ; will  delight  in  earth  work  j will  be  boatmen  ; 
will  be  dealers  in  fruits  and  flowers  of  water. 

19.  Those  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  U*  Ashadha 
will  be  chief  ministers  or  wrestlers  ; will  keep  elephants  and 
horses,  will  be  religious  ; will  be  men  of  principle  j soldiers  ; 
happy  and  of  bright  appearance. 

20.  Those  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  Sravana 
will  be  cunning,  of  active  habits,  efficient  workmen,  bold, 
virtuous,  god-fearing  and  truthful. 

21.  Those  who  are  born  on  the  Innar  day  of  Sravishta 
will  be  shameless,  of  weak  friendship,  haters  of  women, 
generous,  rich  and  free  from  temptation* 

22.  Those  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  Satabhishak 
will  be  fishermen  or  dealers  in  fish  and  hogs  ; washermen ; 
dealers  in  wine  and  birds. 

23.  Those  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  P.  Bhadra- 
pada  will  be  thieves,  shepherds,  torturers  ; wicked,  mean,  and 


CH.  15.] 


I3RIHAT  SAMHITA. 


91 


deceitful  ; will  possess  no  virtues  ; will  neglect  religious  rites 
and  will  be  successful  in  fight. 

24.  Those  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  U.  Bhadra- 
pada  will  be  Brahmins,  performers  of  sacrificial  rights  ; will  be 
generous,  devout,  rich  aud  observant  of  the  rules  of  the  holy 
orders  ; will  be  heretics,  rulers,  dealers  in  rice. 

25.  Those  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  Revati  will 
be  dealers  iu  water-flowers,  salt,  gems,  conch  shells,  pearls, 
creatures  of  water,  fragrant  flowers  aud  perfumes  3 they  may 
also  be  boat-men. 

26.  Those  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  Aswani  will 
keep  horses,  will  be  'commanders  of  army  ; physicians,  ser- 
vants, dealers  in  horse,  riders,  tradesmen  or  masters  of  horses. 

27.  Those  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  Bharani 
will  deal  in  precious  stones,  will  be  flesh  eaters,  will  be  wick- 
ed men  ; will  delight  in  acts  of  killing  and  torture  ; will  be 
dealers  in  pod  grains  3 will  be  of  low  descent  or  weak-minded. 

28.  The  constellations  of  P«  Phalguni,  P.  Ashadha,  P. 
Bhadrapada  and  Krittika  belong  to  the  Brahmin  class  ; those  of 
Pushya,  U.  Phalguni,  IJ.  Ashadha  and  U«  Bhadrapada  belong 
to  the  Kshatriya  class,  ; those  of  Revati,  Anuradha,  Magha 
and  Rohini  belong  to  the  Sudra  class. 

29.  The  constellations  of  Punarvasu,  Hasta,  Abhijit  and 
Aswini  belong  to  the  Vaisya  class  ; those  of  Mula,  Ardra, 
Swati  and  Satabhishak  belong  to  the  butcher  class. 

30.  The  constellations  of  Mrigaseersha,  Jyeshta,  Chittra 
and  Sravishta  belong  to  the  serving  class  ; those  of  Aslesha, 
Visakha,  Sravana  and  Bharani  belong  to  the  lowest  or  Cluin- 
dala  class. 

31.  That  constellation  in  which  the  Sun  and  Saturn 
might  happen  to  be  together  or  through  which  Mars  might 
happen  to  pass  or  in  which  the  retrograde  motion  of  a planet 
might  lie  or  in  which  a lunar  or  solar  eclipse  might  take  place 
or  through  which  the  moon  might  pass. 


92 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[on.  10. 


32.  Will  bring  misery  to  tlie  persons  ami  objects  it 
represents.  If  on  the  other  hand  the  constellation  shonhl  be 
free  from  any  such  affection  the  same  persons  or  objects  will 
prosper. 

CHAPTER.  XVL 
On  the  Planets. 

f.  The  sun  presides  over  the  people  of  the  W estern  half 
of  the  Nerbada-,  of  the  countries  on  both  banks  of  the  Sonne^ 
of  Orissa,  Bengal,  Suhma,  Kalinga,  Balhika,  Saka,  Yavana, 
Magada,  Sahara,  Eastern  parts  of  Jotishapura,  China  and 
Camboja. 

2,  Over  the  people  of  Mekala,  Kirata,  Vitaka,  the  outer 
and  inner  mountains,  Pulinda,  the  Eastern  half  of  Dravida  and 
the  east  bank  of  the  Jumna. 

8.  Over  the  people  of  the  Churapa  city,  the  Udurnbaras, 
the  citizens  of  Kousambi,  of  Chedi,  of  Kalinga  in  the  forest 
of  the  Vindeya  mountains,  of  Pundra,  of  Golangula,  of  SrE 
parvata  and  of  the  town  of  Vardhamana  ; 

4.  And  over  the  people  living  on  the  banks  of  the  Iks- 
humati*  He  also  presides  over  hill-men,  quick-silver,  deserts, 
shepherds,  seeds,  pod  grains,  bitter  flavor,  trees,  gold,  fire, 
poison,  persons  successful  in  battle* 

5»  Over  medicines,  physicians,  quadrupeds,  farmers, 
kings,  butchers,  travellers,  thieves,  serpents,  forests  and  re- 
nowned and  cruel  men. 

6.  The  moon  presides  over  citadels  fortified  by  hills  or 
by  water,  over  Oude,  Broach,  the  sea,  the  city  of  Rome,  the 
country  of  Tukhara,  dwellers  in  forests,  the  islands  of  Tankana, 
Ilala  and  Strirajya  in  the  big  seas. 

7.  She  presides  over  sweet  juice,  flowers,  fruits,  water, 
salt,  gems,  conch  shells,  pearls,  creatures  of  water,  paddy, 
barley,  medicinal  plants,  wheat,  Soraayajis,  kings  attacked  in 
the  rear,  and  Brahmins. 


CH.  IG.] 


BRIIIAT  SAMIIITA. 


98 


8.  Slie  also  presides  over  finO;  white  horses,  charming 
youn"  women,  commanders  of  armies,  articles  of  food,  clothes, 
horned  animals,  the  Rakshasas,  farmers  and  S7'oiitieS‘^ 

9*  Mars  presides  over  the  people  residing  in  the  west 
half  of  the  countries  on  both  banks  of  the  Sonne,  the  Nerbada 
and  the  Beas  ; over  those  residing  on  the  banks  of  tlie  Nir- 
vindhya,  the  Vetravati,  the  Sipra,  the  Godavary  and  the 
Vena. 

10.  The  Ganges,  the  Pioshni,  the  Mahanadi,  the  Indus, 
the  Malati  and  the  Para  ; he  also  presides  over  the  country 
of  Uttara  Pandya,  the  Mahendra,  the  Vindaya  and  the  Malaya 
mountains  and  the  Chdladesa* 

11.  The  Dravidas,  the  Videhas,  the  Andhras,  the  As- 
makas,  the  Bhasapuras,  the  Konkanas,  the  Mantrishikas,  the 
Kuntalas,  the  Keralas,  the  Dandakas,  the  Kantipuras,  the 
Mlechas  and  the  mixed  races- 

12.  He  also  presides  over  Nassik,  Bhogavardhana,  Vi- 
rata, the  countries  bordering  on  the  Vindaya  mountains  and 
over  the  people  living  on  the  banks  of  the  Tapti  and  the 
Gumtee- 

13.  He  presides  over  citizens,  farmers,  chemists,  firemen, 
soldiers,  forest-men,  citadels,  chief  towns,  butchers,  sinners, 
haughty  men  ; 

14.  Kings,  children,  elephants,  fops,  infanticides,  shep- 
herds, red  fruits,  red  flowers,  corals,  commanders  of  armies, 
jaggery,  wine  and  cruel  men  ; 

15.  Over  store-houses,  Agnihotries,  metal  mines,  the 
Sakhyas  in  red  robes,  the  Budhists,  thieves,  rogues,  persons 
harboring  deep  hatred  and  gluttons. 

16.  Mercury  presides  over  the  western  half  of  the  Lou- 
hitya  river,  the  Indus,  the  Gogra,  the  Gambhiraka,  the  Ratha, 

* Srouty,  a person  skilled  in  a knowledge  of  the  rules  relating  to  sacrificial 
rites. 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


94 


[CH.  16. 


* the  Ganges  and  its  tributary  the  Kousi.  He  also  presides 
over  the  countries  of  Videha,  and  Camboja  j 

17.  The  eastern  half  of  Muttra^  the  Himalayas,  the  Go- 
manta  and  the  Chitrakuta  mountains,  Surat,  people  living  on 
table  lands,  on  the  surface  of  water,  in  valleys  and  in  moun- 
tains ; 

18.  Over  persons  possessing  a knowledge  of  the  laws  of 
drink,  of  mechanics,  of  music,  of  writing,  of  gems,  of  color 
and  of  perfumes  ; he  also  presides  over  painters,  grammarians, 
mathematicians,  physicians,  sculptors  ; 

19.  Spies,  jugglers,  infants,  poets,  rogues,  tale-bearers, 
black-magicians,  messengers,  hermaphrodites,  buffoons,  sor- 
cerers, and  conjurers  ; 

20.  Over  sentinels,  dancers  and  dancing  masters ; over 
ghee,  gingelly  and  other  oils  ; over  seeds,  over  bitter  flavor, 
over  observers  of  religious  ceremonies,  over  chemists  and 
mules* 

21.  Jupiter  presides  over  the  eastern  part  of  the  Indus, 

the  western  half  of  Muttra,  the  countries  of  Bharata,  and 
Souveera ; the  town  of  Srughna,  the  province  of  Udichya, 
the  Vipasa  and  the  Satadru  rivers,  the  countries  of  Ramatha, 
Salva  ; 

22.  Trigarta,  Pourava,  Ambashta,  Parata,  Vatadhana, 
Youdheya,  Saras vata,  Arjunayana,  one  half  of  Matsya  ; 

23*  Over  elephants,  horses,  priests,  rulers,  ministers, 
marriages  and  health  ; over  mercy,  truthfulness,  cleanliness, 
religious  observances  ; over  learning,  gifts  and  charity  ; 

24.  Over  citizens,  richmen,  grammarians,  Vedic  students, 
sorcerers,  lawyers,  the  ensigns  of  royalty — the  umbrella,  the 
flag-staff,  the  Chamara  and  the  like  ; 


* Ratha  is  the  Gundak  according  to  Kasyapa. 


CH*  16.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


95 


25.  Over  Saileyika,*  mansi^f  tahara^J  kashtha^^  quick- 
silver^  salt,  beaus,  sweet  flavor,  wax  and  choraka.|| 

26.  Venus  presides  over  the  town  of  Takshaseela,  the 
countries  of  Martikavata,  Bahugiri,  Gandhara,  Pushkalavataka, 
Prasthala,  Malwa,  Kaikaya,  Dasarna,  Osinara  and  8ibi. 

27.  Over  the  people  living  on  the  banks  of  the  Vithasta, 
the  Irawadi  and  the  Chaudrabhaga  ; over  chariots,  silver  mines, 
elephants,  horses,  elephant  drivers  and  rich  men; 

28.  Over  perfumes,  flowers,  perfumed  paste,  gems, 
diamonds,  ornaments,'  lotus  or  conch  shells,  beds,  bridegrooms, 
young  men,  young  women,  objects  tending  to  provoke  lustful 
desires  and  persons  that  eat  good  and  sweet  meals ; 

29.  Over  gardens,  waters,  voluptuaries  and  lewed  men  ; 
over  fame,  comfort,  generosity,  beauty,  and  learning  ; over 
ministers,  merchants,  potters,  birds  and  triphala** 

80.  Over  simple  silk,  colored  silk,  flannel  cloth,  white 
silk,  rodhra,t  patra,^  chocha,§  nutmeg,  agaru,||  vacha,T[ 
pippili*  and  sandal. 

* Saileika  : benzoiu  or  storax  known  in  Tamil  as 

t Mansi  : otherwise  known  as  Jatamansi,  a medicinal  grass — Cyperes  stoloni- 
f eress  known  in  Tamil  as  «£Fz_/rLO/r(^^. 

J Tahara : the  plant  Casia  Tora,  whose  seed  is  known  in  Tamil  as 
^ s JT  sS  esiir. 

§ Kushtha  : a medicinal  plant  used  as  a remedy  for  the  disease  called  Takman 
Costus.  Speciosus  or  Arahicus  known  in  tamil  as  G ,3 

11  Choraka  ; the  husk  of  cardamom  known  in  Tamil  as  ireOih  or  ^ 

* Triphala  : the  three  fruits — the  three  myrohalans,  the  fruits  Terminalia 
Chehula,  T.  Bellerica,  and  Pbyllanthus  Emhlica  Known  in  Tamil  as  ^cS/r 

jgfr&^s<s iTuu  imd  iruj  ; 

or  the  three  fragrant  fruits  of  nutmeg,  arecanut  and  cloves ; 
or  the  three  sweet  fruits  of  grape,  pomegarnate  and  date. 

t Rodhra  : the  tree  Symplocos  Rocemosa  having  yellow  leaves,  known  in 
Tamilas  Qau<^'2e(r  OeOrr^^miTu^, 

J Patra  ; the  leaves  of  Cinnamon. 

§ Chocha  : the  hark  of  Cinnaman, 

11  Agaru:  Agallochum,  Amyris  Agallocha  known  in  Tamil  as 

^ Vacha  : a kind  of  . aromatic  root  (according  to  some  orris  root)  known  in 
Tamil  as 

* Pippili  : long  pepper— Piper  longum  known  in  Tamil  as  ^uiSleS. 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


96 


[CH.  16. 


31.  Saturn  presides  over  the  countries  of  Anarta^  Arbu- 
da,  Pushkara,  Surat,  Abhira,  Sudra,  Raivataka,  countries 
through  which  the  river  Saraswati  passes  as  an  under-ground 
stream  and  the  western  countries. 

32.  Over  the  natives  of  Kurukshetra,  the  town  of 
Somnat,  and  persons  born  on  the  banks  of  the  Vidisa,  the 
Vedasmriti  and  the  Mahi  ; over  wicked  men,  uncleanly  men 
and  men  of  the  lowest  class  j over  oil  mongers,  weak  men  and 
persons  not  possessing  virility. 

33.  Over  binders,  bird  hunters,  impure  men,  boatmen, 
or  fishermen,  ugly  men  and  old  men  ; over  dealers  in  hogs, 
chiefs  of  tribes,  men  of  weak  resolution,  hill  men,  barbarous 
mountain  tribes  and  over  poor  men. 

34.  He  also  presides  over  pungent  flavor  and  bitter 
flavor;  over  chemistry;  over  widows,  serpents,  thieves,  buffa- 
loes, asses,  camels,  beans,  leguminous  seeds  and  Nishpava.* 

35.  Rahu  presides  over  hill  men,  mountain  peaks,  outer 
and  inner  caves,  the  Mlechas,  the  Sudras_,  persons  subsisting 
on  dogs  and  jackals,  spear  men,  the  countries  of  Vokkana  and 
Aswamukha  and  persons  physically  deformed. 

36.  He  also  presides  over  the  most  wicked  in  the  family, 
over  torturers,  ungrateful  men,  thieves,  persons  who  are  un- 
truthful, uncleanly  and  ungenerous  ; over  ass-riders,  duelists, 
persons  of  easily  irritable  temperament,  infants  in  the  womb 
and  Chandalas. 

37.  Over  notorious  sinners,  fops,  Rakshasas,  excessive 
sleepers,  all  sentient  beings  and  wicked  persons  ; over  black 
gram  and  gingelly  seed. 

38.  Ketu  presides  over  mountains,  fortified  cities,  the 
countries  of  Palhava,  Sweta,  Huna;  Chola,  Avagana,  Maru 


* Nishpava  : a species  of  pulse — Pliaseolus  Raaditus  known  in  Tamil  as 
Qt_/0cr)UiL/^, 


CH.  17.] 


BRIUAT  SAMHITA. 


97 


China,  and  the  land  of  the  Mlechas  j over  rich  men,  men  of 
note,  men  of  industry  and  valor  ; 

89.  Over  men  coveting  the  wives  of  others,  men  prying 
into  the  secrets  of  other  men,  haughty  men,  ignorant  men, 
sinners  and  persons  fond  of  victory. 

40.  If  at  the  time  of  re-appearance,  a planet  should 
appear  bright,  of  large  disc  and  in  his  natural  condition,  not 
crossed  by  thunder-bolts,  meteoric  falls  or  dust-storms  and 
not  suffer  in  conjunction  with  other  planets  or  if  he  should 
be  in  his  house  or  in  his  Ucchakshetra  or  if  he  should  be  within 
sight  of  a benefic  planet,  he  will  bring  prosperity  to  the  persons 
and  objects  presided  over  by  him. 

41-  If  on  the  other  hand  he  should  appear  otherwise 
than  as  described  above,  the  same  persons  and  objects  will 
suffer  miseries  and  people  will  also  suffer  from  wars  and  from 
diseases  and  kings  will  be  afflicted  with  sorrow. 

42.  Though  free  from  enemies,  princes  will  suffer  from 
the  intrigues  of  their  sous  or  ministers.  Their  subjects, 
suffering  from  drought,  will  quit  their  native  cities  and  resort 
to  new  towns  and  mountains. 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

On  Planetary  Conjunctions. 

1.  Astronomers  are  able  to  predict  by  calculation  before- 
hand the  times  and  nature  of  planetary  conjunctions*  I have 
treated  of  this  subject  in  my  astronomical  work,  Panchasi- 
dhantika*  basing  my  theories  on  the  Surya  Sidhanta. 

2.  The  planets  all  revolve  in  the  sky  and  their  orbits  of 
motion  lie  one  above  the  other.  When  seen  from  this  great 
distance,  the  planets  seem  to  move  on  one  even  surface. 

* Panclaasidhantika  : — The  public  will  be  exceedingly  glad  to  hear  that  two 
copies  of  this  splendid  work  on  Astronomy,  long  supposed  to  have  been  lost,  have 
been  purchased  by  the  Bombay  Government  and  that  G.  Thibaut  Phil.  Dr.  assisted 
by  Pundit  Suddhakara  is  preparing  an  edition  and  an  English  Translation  of  the 
work. 


13 


98 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  17. 


3.  The  conjiincfcions  of  the  planets  are  of  4 sorts  known 
technically  as  1.  Blieda,^  2.  UUelihay-f  3.  Amsiimardanajt 

4.  Asavya}\\  according  as  the  planets  are  more  and  more  dis- 
tant from  each  other,  as  stated  by  Parasara  and  other  Rishis. 

4* * * §  If  the  planets  should  be  in  Bheda  conjunction  there 
will  be  drought  in  the  land  ; friends  and  persons  of  great 
families  will  turn  into  enemies  ; if  the  planets  should  be  in 
Ullekha  conjunction  there  will  be  wars  in  the  land,  and  princes 
will  quarrel  with  their  enemies  ; but  there  will  be  abundance 
of  good  food. 

5.  If  the  planets  should  be  in  Amsuvimarda  conjunction, 
kings  will  be  at  war  and  mankind  will  suffer  from  weapons, 
from  disease  and  from  hunger ; if  they  should  be  in  Apasavya 
conjunction,  rulers  will  be  at  war  with  one  another. 

6.  The  Sun  when  in  mid-heaven  is  known  as  an  Ahranda 
planet ; when  in  the  East  he  is  known  as  a Poiira  planet  and 
when  in  the  West  he  is  known  as  a Yayi  planet*  Mercury, 
Jupiter  and  Saturn  are  always  known  as  Poura  planets*  The 
Moon  is  always  known  as  an  Akranda  planet* 

7.  Ketu,  Mars,  Rahu  and  Venus  are  known  as  Yayi  pla- 
nets. The  planet  that  suffers  defeat§  in  conjunction  will  cause 
suffering  to  the  objects  it  represents ; but  if  triumphant,  the 
objects  will  prosper* 

8.  If  a Poura  (citizen)  planet,  should  suffer  defeat  in 
conjunction  with  another  Poura  planet,  citizens  and  rulers 


* Bheda  : this  conjunction  occurs  when  the  disc  of  one  of  the  planets  appears 
eclipsed  by  that  of  the  other  planet. 

t Ullekha  : this  occurs  when  the  disc  of  the  one  appears  to  rub  against  the 
disc  of  the  other. 

X Amsuraardana  : this  occurs  when  the  light  of  the  one  mixes  with  the  light  of 
tho  other. 

II  Asavya  : this  occurs  when  the  planets  are  distinctly  apart  from  each  other. 

§ Planetary  conjunction,  is  known  in  Hindu  Astronomy  as  Yudha  (fight)  ; 
when,  a planet  in  conjunction,  is  to  be  deemed  as  suffering  defeat  or  as  trium- 
phant, the  author  describes  further  on. 


cii.  17.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


99 


will  suffer.  Also  if  a Yayi  (marching  to  war)  planet  should 

suffer  defeat  in  conjunction  with  another  Yayi  planet  or  if  an 

Akranda  (setting  up  a war  cry)  planet  should  suffer  defeat  in 

conjunction  with  another  Akranda  planet  or  if  either  a Poura 

or  Yayi  planet  should  suffer  defeat  in  conjunction  with  a Yayi 

or  a Poura  planet  respectively  the  objects  represented  by  the 

planet  which  suffers  defeat  will  suffer  miseries. 

.♦ 

9.  That  planet  is  said  to  suffer  defeat  in  conjunction, 
which  might  happen  to  be  the  Southern  one,  or  of  disagree- 
able appearance  or  of  unsteady  light  or  which  might  begin  to 
retrograde  immediately  after  conjunction  or  which  might  ap- 
pear to  be  of  small  disc  or  which  might  be  eclipsed  by  the 
other  planets  or  which  might  undergo  a change  of  nature  or 
appear  dim  or  of  ugly  appearance* 

10*  If  the  planet  should  appear  otherwise  than  as  des- 
cribed above,  he  is  deemed  to  be  the  triumphant  planet  and 
that  planet  in  conjunction  which  might  appear  of  large,  bright, 
shining  disc  is  deemed  triumphant  though  he  might  be  the 
southern  planet*^ 

11.  If  both  planets  should  be  equally  bright,  large  and 
shining,  the  conjunction  is  known  as  Samagama — mere  meet- 
ing as  opposed  to  a meeting  in  fight.  In  such  cases  there  is 
a mutual  liking  between  the  planets — and  hence  also  between 
the  persons  and  objects  they  represent  ; but  if  both  planets 
should  be  otherwise,  the  same  persons  and  objects  will  perish. 

12.  In  cases  where  it  might  be  doubtful  whether  the 
conjunction  of  two  planets  is  a conjunction  in  fight  or  a mere 
meeting,  it  is  also  doubtful  whether  princes  will  prosper  or 
suffer. 


* The  commentator  states,  as  a corollary  to  the  above,  that  a planet  in  con- 
1 unction  which  might  appear  of  small  disc  or  dim  must  be  deemed  to  suffer  defeat 
though  he  might  be  the  northern  planet. 

Again  as  Yenus  is  ever  bright,  he  is  generally  the  successful  planet  in  conjunc- 
tions whether  he  happens  to  be  the  northern  or  southern  planet  according  to 
Suria  Sidhanta  and  Pulisa  Sidhanta. 


100 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  17. 


13.  If  Mars  should  suffer  defeat  in  his  conjunction  with 
Jupiter,  the  Balhikas,  travellers  and  persons  that  live  by  fire 
will  suffer  ; if  he  should  so  suffer  in  his  conjunction  with 
Mercury  the  Surasenas,  the  Kalingas  and  the  Salvas  will 
suffer. 

14.  If  Mars  should  suffer  defeat  in  his  conjunction  with 
Saturn,  townsmen  will  prosper  but  country  people  will  suffer  ; 
if  he  should  so  suffer  in  his  conjunction  with  Venus,  store- 
houses, the  Mlechas  and  the  Kshatriyas  will  suffer. 

15.  If  Mercury  should  suffer  defeat  in  his  conjunction 
with  Mars,  trees,  rivers,  ascetics,  the  people  of  Asmaka,  the 
people  of  the  North,  sacrificial  rites  and  the  Deekshitas  per- 
forming them  will  suffer  much. 

16.  If  Mercury  should  suffer  defeat  in  his  conjunction 
with  Jupiter,  the  Mlechas,  the  Sudras,  thieves,  rich  men,  the 
people  of  Trigarta  and  those  of  mountainous  countries  will 
suffer  and  there  will  also  be  Earth-quakes. 

17.  If  Mercury  should  suffer  defeat  in  his  conjunction 
with  Saturn,  boatmen,  soldiers,  creatures  of  water,  rich  men 
and  pregnant  women  will  suffer  ; if  he  should  so  suffer  in  his 
conjunction  with  Venus,  there  will  be  fear  of  injury  from  fire 
and  crops,  clouds  and  travellers  will  suffer* 

18.  If  Jupiter  should  suffer  defeat  in  his  conjunction 
with  Venus  the  people  of  Kuluta,  of  Kandahar,  of  Kaikaya, 
of  Madra,  of  Salva,  of  Vatsa  and  of  Bengal  will  suffer;  crops 
and  cows  will  perish. 

19.  If  Jupiter  should  suffer  defeat  in  his  conjunction 
with  Mars,  the  people  of  Madhyadesa  and  princes  will  suffer 
and  cows  will  perish  ; if  he  should  so  suffer  in  his  conjunction 
with  Saturn,  the  people  of  Arjunayana,  of  Vasati,  of  You- 
dheya,  of  Sibi  and  the  Brahmins  will  perish. 

20.  If  Jupiter  should  suffer  defeat  in  his  conjunction 
with  Mercury,  the  Mlechas,  truthful  men,  armed  soldiers  and 


CH.  17.] 


BEIHAT  SAMHITA. 


]01 


Madhyadesa  will  suffer;  also  the  various  persons  and  objects 
pr  esided  over  by  Jupiter  will  suffer. 

21.  If  Jupiter  should  suffer  defeat  in  his  conjunction  with 
Venus^  travellers  and  eminent  men  will  perish.  The  Brahmins 
and  the  Kshatriyas  will  be  at  war  and  there  will  be  no  rain. 

22.  The  people  of  Kosala,  Kalin^a,  Bengal,  Vatsa  Matsya 
Madhyadesa  and  Surasena  and  hermaphrodites  will  suffer 
great  miseries. 

23*  If  venus  should  suffer  defeat  in  his  conjunction  with 
Mars,  the  chiefs  of  armies  will  perish  and  princes  will  be  at 
war;  if  Venus  should  so  suffer  in  his  conjunction  with  Mercury, 
the  people  of  mountainous  countries  will  suffer;  milk  will  be 
injured  and  there  will  be  slight  rain. 

24.  If  Venus  should  suffer  defeat  in  his  conjunction  with 
Saturn,  the  chiefs  of  tribes,  soldiers,  the  Kshatriyas  and  crea- 
tures of  water  will  suffer;  the  several  objects  and  persons  pre- 
sided over  by  Venus  will  also  suffer  in  addition. 

25*  If  Saturn  should  suffer  defeat  in  his  conjunction 
with  Venus,  the  price  of  food  grains  will  rise  and  snakes  and 
birds  will  suffer.  If  he  should  so  suffer  in  his  conjunction  with 
Mars,  the  people  of  Tankana,  of  Northern  circars,  of  Orissa,  of 
Benares,  and  of  Balhika  will  suffer. 

26.  If  Saturn  should  suffer  defeat  in  his  conjunction 
with  Mercury,  the  people  of  Bengal,  tradesmen,  birds,  animals 
and  snakes  will  suffer;  if  he  should  so  suffer  in  his  conjunction 
with  Jupiter,  women  will  be  happy  ; buffaloes  and  the  Scy- 
thians will  suffer. 

27.  Thus  have  been  described  the  special  effects  of  the 
defeats  of  Mars,  Mercury,  -Jupiter,  Venus  and  Saturn  in  their 
conjunctions,  each,  with  the  other  planets.  To  these  effects 
must  be  added  the  effects  resulting  to  the  several  objects  and 
persons  presided  over  by  the  several  planets.  These  will 
suffer  in  proportion  to  the  extent  of  defeat  of  the  planets  pre- 
siding over  them. 


BRJHAT  SAMHITA. 


102 


[CH.  17. 


List  of  Indian  Geographical  terms  alphahetically  arranged  with 
their  modern  names  given  opposite  to  each. 


A. 


Abdhinagai’i,  Dwaraka  (tlie  old). 
Aliicchatra,  Ahicchatter. 
Ajameetham,  Ajmere. 

Akasijgunga,  Mandakinee. 
Alakaimnda,  Alaknunda. 

A 11]  arakantaka,  0 m e rkantak. 
Ambaslita,  Lahore  (District). 
Aniritasaras,  Amritsur. 

Anartam;  Kattywar. 

Anarthanagaree,  Dwaraka  (the  old). 
Andhananagarum,  Vegi,  ; Vengi. 
Anga,  Bengal  proper  near  Bhagalpur, 
Angadapuri,  Shahabad  (in  Oude). 
Angadeeya,  Shahabad  (in  Oude). 
Angadesa,  Bhagalpur  (the  District). 
Angapui’i,  Bhagalpur  (the  town). 
Antarvedi,  Gangetic  Doab. 

Apaga,  Apaga  (a  stream). 

Aratta,  Gujerat  (province)  in  Punjab. 
Ai’buda,  Aboo. 

Aryavarta,  Northern  India. 

Ashmaka,  Travancore. 

Asi,  Asi  (river). 

Asmaka,  Bhira  (Purana). 

Atreyi,  Atrae  (river). 

Avantayah,  Malwa  (Western). 

Avanti,  Oojien, 

Avantipuram,  Vantipur. 

Ayodhya,  Oude  (the  town). 

B. 


Baleswaram,  Balasor. 

Balhika,  Balk. 

Bhadra,  Badra. 

Bhagirathee,  Hoogly ; Ganges. 
Bharatavai’sha,  India. 
Bharukaccha,  Baroacli. 

Bheema,  Beema. 

Bheemarati,  Beema. 

Bhogavati,  Bagmati. 
Brahmaputra,  Brahmaputra. 
Brahmasarah,  Brahmasarus. 
Brahmayoni  : Brahmajuin  (a  hill). 
Bnhmavarta,  India  Upper. 
Brindavana,  Brindabun. 


c. 


Chaityakagiri,  Ratnagiri. 
Champa,  Bliagulpur  (the  town). 


Chandra,  Chenab. 
Chandrakanta,  Chandpur. 
Chandrika,  Chenab. 
Oharmanvati,  Chumbul. 
Chattagrama  Chittagong. 
Cheena,  China. 
Chintarathya,  Chindinthura. 
Chitra,  Chittaui*. 

Chitrakuta,  Chitrakote. 
Chitropala,  Chittaur. 
Cholamandala,  Coromandal. 


D. 


Dakshinamanasam,  Dakshinamanas- 
Dakshinapatha,  Southern  India. 
Damaliptam,  Tumlook. 

Damodara,  Damudar. 

Darada,  Dard  (the  country). 
Darduragiri,  South  Eastern  Ghauts. 
Darapurara,  Dholpore  ? 

Dasapura,  part  of  Malwa  or  Bundel 

Kund 

Dasarna,  Dasan  (idver  or  country). 
Daseraka,  the  Great  Desert. 

Devagiri,  Deogir  or  Dowlatabad. 
Devahrida,  Deverkunda. 

Devikodham,  Dinajpore  (Southern), 
Dhara,  Dhar. 

Dharmapattanam,  Sahet  Mahet  ? 
Dharmapuram,  Dharmapur. 
Dharraaranyam,  Dharmrun. 
Drishtadvate,  Cagar. 

Dushpara,  Cheuaub. 

Dwaravali,  Dwaraka  (the  old.) 
Dwarika,  Dwaraka  (the  old). 


a. 


Gadagrama,  Gargaon. 

Gadhinagarum,  Kanouj. 

Ganarajya,  Name  of  an  Empire  in  the 

South  of  India. 
Gandaka,  Ganda  (District). 

Gandaki,  Gandak. 

Ganga,  Ganges. 

Gangadri,  Gangotree. 

Gangadvai’a,  Hurdwar. 

Gandara,  Eastern  Afganistan. 
Gharghara,  Gogra. 

Ghardhara,  Cagar. 

Girivrija,  the  Capital  of  Magada. 


cir.  17.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


108 


Girivrijam,  Raigir. 

Godavaree,  GoJavaree. 

Gokarna,  llameswarani. 

Gomatee,  Gnmtee. 

Gorathagiri,  Silagii’i. 

Govardhana,  Gobardban. 

Gouda,  Bengal  (Northern.) 

Gourapuri,  Gaur. 

Gurjara,  Gujerat  (Province)  in  Punjab. 


H. 


Haimavater,  Ganges, 
llarikeliya,  Bengal  (Eastern.)  * 
Hariprasthan,  Delhi  (town.) 

Hataka,  Lodak  (pi'ovince.) 

Heraakuta,  A mountain  to  the  north  of 

the  Himalayas. 

Hemanta,  Heraa.  C 

Hiranvate,  Ramaganga. 

Hiranyabahu,  Sona  (river.) 

Hiraryavnha,  Sona  (river.) 

Hradiuee,  Jhelum  (river.) 


I. 


Indrapi’astham,  Delhi  (town.) 
Induja,  Nerbudda. 

Indumatee,  Kaleemudee  (Eastern.) 
Indumatee,  Chenaub  ? 

Iravati.  Eavee, 


J. 


Jalundhara,  Jullunder  Doab. 
Jambavaka,  Jumna. 

Janhavee,  Ganges. 
Janmabhumi,  India  (Northern.) 
Jina  Chakri,  India  (Northern.) 
Jaypura,  Jaipur. 

Jyotirathee,  Johila, 


K. 


Kaccha.  Chashak  (the  plain.) 

Kacchara,  Cachar  ? 

Kalanjara,  Calinjar. 

Kalindapurara,  Karnapur. 

Kalindee,  Jamna. 

Kalinga,  A District  in  the  Coroman  dal 
coast  (Ganjam  District.) 
Kalinganagari,  Rajmahendri, 

Kalyanam>  Caliau. 


Kalyanee,  Kalianee. 

Kamarupa,  Kamroop. 

Kampilyain,  Kainpil. 

Kanaklialam,  Kanklial,  (village.) 
Kanakhal,  Khankhal  (the  mountain.) 
Kanchipuri,  Conjevarara. 

Kannada,  N.  Canara. 

Kanyakubjam,  Kanonj. 

Kapee,  Capul  (river.) 

Kapisa,  Cosay  (a  river  in  Midnapur.) 
Kapisee,  Opian. 

Kapishtalam,  Kaithal. 

Kaseepuree,  Benares. 

Kashmira,  Cashmere. 

Kataka,  Cuttack, 

Kaveri,  Cauvery  (river.) 

Keekadha,  Behar  (Southern.) 

Keera,  Cashmere. 

Kela,  Canara. 

Kerala,  Malabar. 

Ketakapuram,  Kaira. 

Khagi,  Kakpur. 

Khatwangi,  Pnnchagnnga. 

Khunamusha,  Khunomush. 

Kolahalagiri,  Brahmajiuin  (a  hill.) 
Kolapurani,  Colapore. 

Konkana,  Konkan. 

Kasala,  Oude  (the  province). 

Kosee,  Kosi. 

Kousambi,  Kosam. 

Konsikee,  Coosi. 

Kousikee  Kacchah,  Purnea  (the  Dis- 
trict). 

Kramarajyam,  Kamraj. 

Krishna  Venee,  Krishna. 

Kritha  Kousika,  Hydrabad  (Western). 
Krouncba,  a mountain  on  the  North  of 

Assam. 

Kulata,  Kulu  (the  district). 

Kumala,  Gomul. 

Kumarika,  Comarin- 
Kundinam,  Bidar  ? 

Kuntala,  Hyderabad  (S.  Western). 

Kuru,  Delhi. 

Kurui’angalam,  Merut  (the  division). 
Kurukshettra,  Paniput. 

Kusasthalam,  Kanonj. 

Kusasthalee,  Ramnagar  ? 

Kusavate,  Ramanagar. 

Kusumapuram,  Patna. 


L. 


Ladha,  Ahmedabad  District. 
Lakshanavati,  Gaur. 
Lalitapattanam,  Lalitputtam. 
Lampaka,  Lamghah. 

Langalinee,  Naglaudi. 

Lanka,  an  island  in  the  Equator. 
Havana.  Looni. 


104 


BRIEIAT  SAMHITA* 


[CH.  17. 


Loliaram,  Labor. 
Loaliitya,  Brahmaputra. 


M. 


Madhumatee,  Sind  (a  river  in  Cash- 

mere.) 

Madhupuram,  Madhupur. 

Madhura.  Madura. 

Madhyadesa,  Central  India. 

Madra,  Bhutan. 

Madradesa,  Rechma  Doab  (lower,) 
Madrishmoti,  Bheragur. 

Magadha,  Behar  (South.) 

Magadhi,  Pancham. 

Mahakosee,  Kosi. 

Mahanadi,  Phaigu. 

Maliarashtra,  Hyderabad  (West). 

M ahapadmasaras,  Walur  Lake. 

Mahee,  Myhe. 

Maheesura,  Mysore. 

Mahendragiri,  Eastern  Ghauts. 
Mahodayam,  Kanouj. 

Mahotsvapuram,  Mahobia* 

Malada,  Shahabad. 

Malawa,  Mahva. 

Malayachala,  Southern  Ghauts. 
Malayavara,  Malabar. 

Malinee,  Bhagulpur  (town.) 

Malinee,  Paisunee. 

Mallabhumi,  Bankora. 

Mallasthauam,  Multan. 

Malyavan,  a mountain  to  the  East  of 

Mount  Meru. 

Mandakini,  Paitan. 

Manimantha,  Salt  Range. 

Manipuram,  Mauipore. 

Manjula,  Manjira. 

Marava,  the  Great  desert. 

Marueaccha,  Baroach, 

Mathura,  Muttra. 

Matsyadesa,  Jeypore. 

Mayapura,  Mayapur. 

Mekala,  Omerakantak  (the  mount.) 
Mekaladrija,  Nerbada. 

Mekalakanya,  Nerbada. 

Mithila,  Tirhut. 

Modagiri,  Moongyr. 

Modapuram,  Madawar  ? 

Mohanee,  Mehanee. 

Murala,  Kalindi. 


N. 


Nagapattanara,  Negapatam. 
Nairanjina.  Nilajan  (a  torrent.) 
Nalasetu,  Adam’s  bridge. 


Nanda,  Alakanunda. 
Nandiuee,  Oude  (the  town.) 
Nasikya,  Nasik. 
Nawadweepa,  Naddea. 
Neelachala,  Nilachal  (a  hill.) 
Nepala,  Nepaul. 

Nicchavi,  Tii'hut. 

Nirvindhya,  Parwati  (West.) 
Nishada,  the  Bhil  Country. 


0. 


Oudhra,  Northern  Orissa. 


P. 


Padmakshetra,  one  of  the  four  sacred 

districts  in  Orissa. 

Padmapura,  Pampur. 

Padmavati,  Cuttack  ? 

Padmavad,  Pudma. 

Pampa,  Paunair  ? 

Panchami,  Panchan. 

Panchanada,  Punjab. 

Panchavati,  Nasik. 

Pauchapam,  Punjab. 

Panjagaram,  Panna. 

Parasika,  Persia. 

Parna,  A Bi-ahmin  settlement  between 
the  damn  a and  the  Ganges. 
Parnasa,  Puiinass,  Punch  (village.) 
Pariyatra,  The  central  or  western  por- 
tion of  the  Vindhya  mountains. 
Pataliputra,  Patna. 

Patishtanam,  Paitan, 

Pattanam  Pattun. 

Peetaseela,  Hyderabad  (in  Sind.) 
Phalgnh,  Phaigu. 

Phengavi,  A mountain  on  the  north  of 

the  river  Indus. 

Pinakini,  Pennar  (river.) 

Poorvagunga,  Nerbada. 

Pondanya,  Badaon. 

Prabhasan.  Pattan  Somauate  ? 
Pragjyotisha,  Kamroop. 
Pragjyotishapuram,  Gauhati 
Prasthala,Pattala. 

Prathudakara,  Pehoa. 

Prayaga,  Allahadad  (Province.) 

Preta  kuta,  Preta  kula  (Gaya) 
Punahpuna,  Pun  pun. 

Pundra,  the  modeim  Bengal  and  Behar. 
Pundravardhana,  Pandua. 

Punnyabhumi,  Noi’tbern  India. 
Puraniya,  Purnea  (town.) 

Puri,  Puri. 

Purvambudhi,  Bay  of  Bengal. 


CH-  17.] 


I3RIHAT  SAMHITA. 


105 


Puslikaram,  Pokur. 
Puishpapurani,  J^atna. 


R. 


Radha,  Western  Bengal. 

Kaivataka,  Girinar, 

Rajagriham,  Kajgar. 

Raj  amahendri , Raj amahendri  ,* 
Kajapuri,  Rajoari. 

Rainagunga,  Ramgunga. 

Rainalirida,  Kurukshetra  (the  lake?) 
Reva,  Nevbada.  ; 

Rikshaparvata,  Satpura  mountains. 
Rishigiri,  Udayagiri  (near  Rajgur). 
Rishikulya,  Risikulia. 

Rodrana,  Adam’s  peak. 

Rohitam,  Rolitak.  { 

Ruma,  Lake  of  iSamber. 
Rungapuvam,  Rangpore. 


s. 


Shyadri,  Siadree. 

Bahyadri,  Western  Ghauts. 

Baka,  the  country  of  the  Scythyans. 
SSakalain,  Sangla. 

Sakambhari,  Samber. 

Saketa,  Ayodhya. 

Salatura,  Lavor. 

Samanaswasaj  Jumna. 

Bamasthalee,  Gangctic  Doab. 
Bankasyam,  Sankesa. 

ISaprayoga,  liugra. 

Saradanda,  Choyaj  Chittang. 

Saravati,  do.  do. 

Sarayu,  Sarju,  Gogra. 

Sarpika,  Sai. 

Batadru,  Satlej. 

Bayyanavatj  Kurukshetra  (lake  ?) 
Beetakundam,  ISeetakuud,  near  Moongir. 
iSetubundha,  Adams’  bridge. 

Sibika,  A district  in  Cashmere. 

Birnhala,  Ceylon. 

ISindhu,  Sind  (a  river  in  Cashmere). 
Sindhudesa,  North  Western  Punjab. 
Sirisham,  Sirisa. 

Sivi,  Jetch  Loabj  (Lower.) 

Sitadru,  Satlej. 

Somodbhava,  Nerbada. 

Sona,  Son. 

Soudhadesa,  Soonda  (District.) 
Sudhapuram,  Soona.  (town.) 
Souraudlira,  Sarhind. 

Sourashtra,  Gujirat,  Kattiwar. 

Souveera,  Jetch  Doab  (uj)per.) 

Sowastha,  Swat  (District.) 


Sowasthavam,  Swat  (town.) 
Sow^asthavee,  Swat  (river.) 
Sravasti,  Sahet  Mahet  ? 

Srihatta,  Sylhet. 

Sreekshetram,  Puri. 
Srirungapattanam,  Seringapatam. 
Srighnuj  Sug. 

Sthanuteertham,  Thaneswar. 
Suhma,  Western  Bengal. 
Sundarivana,  Sunderbans. 
Surapuram,  Sopur. 

Surasena,  Muttra,  (Province.) 
Suriakunda,  Dekshinamanas. 
Surparakurn,  Supa. 
Swarnagraman,  Sunargaon. 
Swarnalee,  Maudakinee. 
Swarnarekha,  Subunrakha. 
Syandika,  Sai. 


T. 


Takhara,  Tartary. 

Tahkapuram,  Taki  (Punjab.) 

Talakotam,  Talicut. 

Tainalika,  Tumlook. 

Tamaralipta,  Tumlook. 

Tamraparni,  Tamara  bari. 

Tangana,  Name  of  a people  in  the 
Upper  part  of  the  valley  of  Sarayu. 
Tapatee,  Taptee. 

Tapee,  Taptee. 

Tilinga,  Hyderabad  (Bast.) 

Tirabhukti,  Tirhut. 

Tiryaksrota,  Ravee  ? 

Trigarta,  Lahore. 

Trigartam,  Tehara. 

Trilinga,  Hyderabad  (East.) 

Tripathaga,  Ganges. 

Tripui’i,  Tewar. 

Trisrota,  Ganges. 

Tu n gabh  ad r a,,  Tu mb u d r a . 

Tungavena,  Tunga. 

Turushka,  Turkestan. 


u. 


Uda,  Orissa. 

Udayagiri,  Udayagiri  in  Orissa. 
Udurnbara,  Cutch. 

Ugra,  Canara. 

Ujayantha,  Girinar. 

Ujjayini,  Oojien. 

Uliika,  Kulu  (District.) 

Upahalaka,  Hyderabad  (South  West.) 
j Urasa,  Rush. 

! Useenara,  Jetch  (doab)  Lower. 

14 


106 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  18* 


Ushkapurara,  Uskara, 

Utkala,  Orissa. 

Uttaramauasam,  Uttaramanus  (m  Oaya.) 


V. 


Vahika,  Punjab . 

V airad  h am , B ai  r at , 

Vaisanti,  Besara._ 

Vaitarani,  Baitarinee. 

Valabhi,  Babri. 

Vanagauga,  Baiiganga. 
Vanamalinee,  Dwaraka  (the  old). 
Vanavasi,  Soonda  (the  District). 
Vauga,  East  Bengal. 

Vanjula,  Manjira. 

Varada,  Baroda,  Murda. 
Varahagiri,  Baibargiri. 
Varahamula.  Barmirla. 

A^arauasi,  Benares. 

Varana,  Barna. 

Varanavata,  Allahabad. 
Varanavatam,  Baraon. 
Vardhamana,  Buvdwan. 
Varendra,  Bengal  (North). 
Varnakulum,  Warangal. 
Varnava,  Bunnoo. 

Varnu,  Kurum  (the  river). 
Varunee,  Kaleenadee.  (West). 
Vatadhanam,  Batnair. 

Vatsadesa,  Allahabad. 
Vatsapatnam,  Kosam. 

Yedasruti,  Bot,  Suti. 


Vedavati,  Vadawatee. 

Veerabhumi,  Birbhum. 

Vena,  VVurna. 

Venasangaga,  Sanglee. 

Vetravati,  Betwa, 

Vidarbha,  Hyderabed  (West.) 

Berar ; Bidar  ? 

V^idasmriti,  Sot;  Suti. 

Videha,  A District  in  the  province 
of  Behar  (Ancient  Mithila).  The 
modern  Tirhoot. 

Vidisa,  Bhilsa. 

Vidyanagaram,  Bijoynagar. 

Vihara,  Behar  (Town.) 

Vikramapurara,  Bikrampur. 
Vindhayachala,  Vindhaya  mountains. 
Vepesa,  Beas. 

Vipulagiri,  Bipulgiri. 

Viratanagaram,  Bairat, 

Visala,  Oojien. 

Vishnupati,  Ganges. 

Vitastha,  Jhelum. 

A^ouanya,  Badaon. 

AGrishabha,  A^iga  ? 

Vyavaharagiri,  Baibargiri. 


Y. 


Yagapura,  Yajpore. 
Yaganapura,  Yajpore. 

Yamuna,  Jamna, 

Yamunadri,  Jumuiiatri  (peaks). 
Yasohara,  Jessore. 

Yuyupuram,  Tripan. 


CHAPTER  XVIIL 

On  the  Moon’s  Conjunction  with  the  Planets. 

1.  If  the  Moon  should  pass  to  the  north  of  the  constel- 
lations (wherever  possible)  and  of  the  planets,  her  course  is 
known  as  Pradakshiua  (course  from  left  to  right).  She  will 
then  cause  prosperity  to  mankind ; if  on  the  other  hand  the 

moon  should  pass  to  the  south  of  the  stars  and  planets  she 
will  cause  misery. 

2.  If  the  Moon  should  pass  to  the  north  of  Mars,  powerful 
mountaineers  will  triumph  in  fight ; the  Kshatriyas  with  their 


CH.  18.] 


BBIITAT  SAMHITA. 


107 


armies  that  march  out  for  battle  will  prosper  and  crops  will  be 
abundant. 

3*  If  the  Moon  should  pass  to  the  north  of  Mercury^ 
citizens  will  triumph  in  fight;  crops  will  flourish;  there  will 
be  mutual  attachment  among  men  and  the  royal  treasuries  will 
be  full. 

♦ 

4*  If  the  Moon  should  pass  to  the  north  of  Jupiter^  citi- 
zenS;  Brahmins,,  the  Kshatriyas,  learned  men,  acts  of  virtue  and 
charity,  the  people  of ' Madhyadesa  will  prosper  and  mankind 
in  general  will  be  happy. 

5.  If  the  Moon  should  pass  to  the  north  of  Venus,  trea- 
suries, elephants  and  horses  will  flourish;  bow-men  that  march 
out  for  fight  will  triumph  and  crops  will  prosper. 

6.  If  the  Moon  should  pass  to  the  north  of  Saturn, 
the  rulers  of  citizens  will  triumph  in  fight  and  the  Scythians, 
the  Bdlhikas,  the  people  of  Sindh,  the  Palhawas  and  the 
Yavanas  will  be  happy. 

7.  Generally  if  the  Moon,  suffering  in  no  way,  should 
pass  to  the  north  of  the  constellations  and  planets,  the  objects 
and  persons  presided  over  by  them  will  prosper  ; if  she  should 
pass  to  their  South,  the  same  objects  and  persons  will  suffer 
miseries. 

8.  In  other  words  the  effects  described,  when  the  course 
of  the  Moon  lies  to  the  north  of  planets  and  stars  will  be 
reversed  when  her  course  lies  to  the  south  of  such  planets  and 

stars.  Thus  have  been  described  the  effects  of  the  Moon^s 

• 

conjunction  with  stars  and  planets.  The  conjunctions  of  the 
Moon  with  the  stars  and  planets  are  not  conjunctions  in  fight 
but  are  mere  meetings  known  technically  as  Samagainas- 


108 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[cir,  19. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

On  Planetary  Years.* 

1.  If  the  Sun  should  be  the  lord  of  the  year,  month  or 
day,  there  will  be  crops  here  and  there,  the  forests  will  be  full 
of  wild,  carnivorous  animals  seeking  for  prey;  springs  will 
yield  but  little  water;  rivers  will  fall;  and  diseases  and 
medicine  will  not  gain  much  in  strength. 

2.  The  heat  of  the  Sun  will  be  felt  intolerable  even  in 
the  dewy  season;  clouds  though  resembling  mountains  in 
size  will  not  yield  much  rain  ; the  sky  will  be  full  of  heavenly 
bodies  of  lost  lustre;  ascetics  and  cows  will  be  afflicted  with 
miseries. 

3-  Princes  will  range  over  the  land  in  military  order 
with  proud  elephants,  horses,  foot-soldiers  and  other  strength, 
armed  with  bows,  swords,  cudgels  and  engaged  in  attacking 
countries  as  they  march. 

4.  If  the  Moon  should  be  the  lord  of  the  year,  the  sky 
will  be  filled  with  clouds  moving  like  mountains  and  of  the 
color  of  black  cobra,  collyrium  or  the  bee  and  filling  the 
whole  Earth  with  water  and  the  sky  with  the  roar  of  thunder. 

5.  The  tanks  will  appear  beautiful  by  the  presence,  in 
them,  of  the  lotus  and  the  white  lily,  the  groves  will  be  full  of 
flower  trees  rendered  charming  by  the  humming  of  black  bees. 
Cows  will  yield  abundance  of  milk,  and  will  thrive;  and  wives 
will  please  their  husbands  by  acts  of  love  for  ever. 

6.  There  will  be  an  abundant  growth  of  wheat,  rice, 
barley  and  other  grains  and  also  of  excellent  sugar-cane;  the 
towns  and  mines  will  flourish;  the  surface  of  the  Earth  will 
be  marked  by  the  construction  of  raised  brick-works  over  the 
sites  of  sacrificial  rites,  the  sky  will  be  filled  with  the  sound 

* The  rule  is  that  the  planet  in  whose  week  day  the  new^moon  falls  in 
the  lunar  month  of  Chaitra  is  the  regent  of  the  year  which  then  commences. 
This  Chapter  is  written  in  beautiful  Sanscrit. 


cii‘  19.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


109 


of  Vedic  hymns  chanted  by  persons  engaged  in  such  rites  ; 
and  the  Earth  will  be  under  the  protection  of  good  rulers. 

7.  If  Mars  should  be  the  lord  of  the  year  there  will  be 
fear  from  destructive  fires  gaining  in  strength  by  the  winds 
that  blow  over  them  and  consuming  villages^  towns  and  forests  ; 
mankind  will  suffer  from  the  attacks  of  robbers,  and  there 
will  be  heard  everywhere  cries  of  distress  and  there  will  also 
bo  loss  of  property  and  cattle. 

8.  Though  gigantic  clouds  might  float  togetlier  in  the 
sky,  they  will  yield  little  rain.  Crops,  even  though  they  might 
be  grown  in  wet  places^  will  become  dry  and  if  they  happen  to 
grow  and  ripen  at  all,  they  will  be  cut  and  carried  away  by 
robbers* 

9.  Rulers  will  little  attend  to  the  protection  of  their 
subjects  ; bilious  complaints  will  afflict  mankind  ; there  will 
also  be  deaths  from  snake-bites  and  crops  will  suffer  blight  or 
be  otherwise  injured. 

10.  If  Mercury  should  be  the  lord  of  the  year,  the  arts 
of  jugglery  and  sorcery  will  thrive  ; rogues  will  prosper; 
towns  and  villages  will  flourish  ; musicians,  writers,  ma- 
thematicians and  persons  skilled  in  the  use  of  arms  will 
abound  in  the  land  and  rulers  will  exchange  rare  and  valuable 

gifts. 

11.  Mankind  will  be  truthful;  Vedic  studies  will  flourish  ; 

criminal  courts  will  administer  justice  according  to  the  code  of 
Manu;  there  will  be  found  students  of  the  higher  metaphy- 
sics  Yoga  Vidya  and  Brahma  Gnana in  many  places 

seeking  their  way  to  Salvation  and  there  will  also  be  found 
students  of  Logic  and  the  like  sciences. 

12.  Buffoons,  messengers,  poets,  children,  hermaphro- 
dites, makers  of  perfumes,  and  persons  living  on  banks,  over 
waters  and  in  mountains  will  prosper  ; medicinal  plants  will 
thrive* 


110 


BRTHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  19. 


13*  If  Jupiter  should  be  the  lord  of  the  year,  the  sound 
of  Vedic  hymns  chanted  aloud  by  Brahmins  in  sacrificial  rites 
will  fill  the  skv,  cause  distress  to  the  enemies  of  the  rites  and 
bring  joy  to  the  minds  of  the  Devas  that  partake  of  the  offerings. 

14.  Abundance  of  excellent  crops  will  mark  the  Earth,  large 
numbers  of  elephants,  horses,  cows  and  foot-soldiers  will 
thrive;  there  will  be  an  increase  of  wealth  ; mankind  will  be 
happy  under  the  protection  of  just  rulers  and  the  Earth  will 
assume  an  appearance  quite  as  bright  as  the  starry  heavens. 

15.  The  sky  will  be  full  of  various  huge  clouds  yielding 
abundance  of  rain  j crops  will  thrive  and  there  will  be  pros- 
perity in  the  land*# 

16.  If  Venus  should  be  the  lord  of  the  year,  rice-crops 
and  sugar-canes  will  flourish,  low  grounds  will  be  filled  with 
rain  water,  tanks  will  appear  beautiful  on  account  of  the  lotus 
growing  in  them  ; and  the  Earth  will  assume  an  appearance 
quite  as  charming  as  a lady  be-decked  with  jewels. 

17*  Rulers  will  achieve  success  in  war  the  sky  will  be 
filled  with  the  sound  of  the  joy  of  triumph  from  the  soldiers 
of  the  army  ; all  good  men  will  be  happy  and  wicked  men 
will  dwindle  and  perish  ; towns  and  villages  will  thrive  and 
the  earth  will  be  under  the  protection  of  just  rulers. 

18.  The  spring  season  will  be  marked  by  husbands  fre- 
quently imbibing  delightful  honey  (wine)  in  the  company  of 
their  wives  ; pleasant  music  from  the  flute  and  the  lyre  will 
oft  delight  the  ear  and  mankind  wfill  partake  of  their  meals  in 
company  with  visitors,  friends  and  kinsmen  and  the  god  of 
love  will  revel  in  triumph. 

19.  If  Saturn  should  be  the  lord  of  the  year,  the  land 
will  suffer  from  wicked  men,  bands  of  robbers  and  big  wars; 
cows  will  perish ; wealth  will  disappear ; there  will  be  heard 

* The  above  are  special  effects  for  Jupiter ; to  these  must  be  added  the 
effects  described  for  the  year  in  the  Ch.  on  Jupiter. 


CH.  20.] 


BRIHAT  SAMIIITA. 


Ill 


the  cries  of  people  mourning  for  the  death  of  their  kinsmen 
in  civil  strife  j severe  epidemics  will  break  out  and  afflict 
people. 

20.  Clouds  will  be  dispersed  by  winds  ; trees  will  suffer 
from  disease  ; the  sky  will  be  filled  with  dust  concealing  from 
view  the  discs  of  the  Sun  and  Moon  ; tanks  will  become  dry 
and  rivers  will  fall. 

■t 

21.  Crops  found  growing  here  and  there  will  perish  for 
want  of  water ; and  in  other  places  they  will  thrive  only 
when  fed  by  the  slight  rain  sent  down  by  Indra* * * § 

22.  Generally  if  the  Lord  of  the  year  should  appear  of 
small  disc  or  dim  or  "in  his  Neecha  house  or  if  he  should 
suffer  defeat  in  conjunction,  he  will  not  produce  all  the  evil 
effects  assigned  to  him.  If  he  should  be  otherwise,  the  effects 
will  be  good.  If  a year  already  known  to  be  a bad  one  (vide 
Ch.  on  Jupiter)  should  also  be  found  bad  under  this  Chapter, 
there  will  be  an  increase  of  adversity  ; if  found  good  in  both 
ways,  then,  an  increase  of  prosperity  ; if  found  to  be  both 
good  and  bad,  there  will  be  a mixture  both  of  prosperity  and 
adversity. 


CHAPTER  XX. 

On  Planetary  Meetings.* 

1*  People  living  in  that  quarter  of  the  earth  will  suffer 
from  weapons,  from  hunger  and  from  other  miseries  in  which 
direction  a planet  reappears  after,  or  disappears  by,  its  con- 
junction with  the  Sun.f 

2.  If  when  the  planets  meet  so  as  to  form  a circle,  a bow, 
a triangle,  a rod,  a citadel,  a lance  or  a VajrayudhaJ  man-' 
kind  will  suffer  from  starvation,  from  drought  and  from  war.§ 

* This  refers  to  the  apparent  geometrical  figures  formed  by  the  meeting  of 
planets, 

t This  accords  with  the  opinion  of  Kasyapa. 

X Vajrayudha:  a three  edged  weapon  nai'row  at  the  middle  and  broad  at 
both  ends. 

§ Kasyapa  says  that  if  the  planets  meet  in  other  than  certain  well-known 
figures  mankind  will  be  happy. 


112 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  20. 


3.  The  rulers  of  those  parts  of  the  earth  will  suffer  from 
foreign  invasions  and  be  dispossessed  of  their  countries  by 
foreign  princes  which  correspond  to  the  quarters  of  the  heavens 
in  which  the  several  planets  are  seen  to  meet  as  described 
above  towards  night-fall.* 

4.  The  objects  and  persons  represented  by  the  several 
asterisrns  in  which  the  planets  happen  to  meet  will  suffer; 
but  if  the  discs  of  the  planets  should  be  bright  and  apart  from 
one  another  there  will  be  happiness  in  the  land* 

5.  Planetary  meetings  are  of  five  sorts  known  technically 
as  1.  Samvarta,  2.  Saniagamaj  3-  SammoJiay  4.  Samoja,  5. 
Sannipata  and  6.  Kosa*  We  will  now  define  these  and  state 
their  effects* 

6.  Ifj  in  a single  sign^  Poura  planets  and  Yayi  planets 
should  meet  together  to  the  number  of  4 or  5,  the  meeting  is 
known  as  Samvarta*  If  either  Hahn  or  Ketn  should  join 
them  the  meeting  is  known  as  Samrnoha. 

7.  If;  in  a single  sign^  there  should  meet  either  Poura 
planets  or  Yayi  planets^  in  either  case  the  meeting  is  known 
as  Samaja.  If  when  Saturn  and  Jupiter  meet;  some  other 
planets  should  join  them;  the  meeting  is  known  as  Kosa.f 

8.  The  meeting  of  a planet  which  reappears  in  the  west 
with  another  planet  which  reappears  in  the  east;  after  their 
conjunction  with  the  Sun  is  known  as  Sannipata.  If  the 
meeting  planets  should  suffer  no  change  in  their  nature  and 
should  appear  bright  and  of  large  size;  the  meeting  is  knowm 
as  Samagama.  There  will  then  be  prosperity  in  the  land* 

9.  The  effects  of  the  Samvarta  and  Samagama  meetings 
are  indifferent — ■ — i*  e*  there  will  be  neither  much  of  pros- 

* Lines  drawn  from  Madhyadesa  and  from  the  Zenith  to  the  eight  points 
of  the  compass  will  divide  both  the  Earth  and  the  sky  into  eight  equal  parts  and 
the  Madhyadesa  will  correspond  to  mid-heaven. 

f This  accords  with  the  opinion  of  Badarayana  ; but  according  to  Parasara  if 
when  Jupiter  and  one  or  two  other  planets  meet,  Saturn  should  join  them,  the 
meeting  is  known  as  Kosa. 


cu-  21.] 


BKIHAT  SAMHITA. 


113 


perity  nor  much  of  adversity;  the  effects  of  the  Sammoba 
and  Kosa  meetings  are  disastrous  in  their  character;  in  the 
Sarnaja  meeting  there  will  be  an  equal  degree  of  prosperity 
and  adversity ; and  in  the  Sannipata  meeting,  mankind  will 
bo  at  war  with  one  another. 


. CHAPTER  XXI. 

On  the  Rain  Clouds.* 

1.  As  food  is  the  support  of  life  and  food  depends  upon 
rainj  it  is  important  to  discover  the  laws  of  rain  by  any 
means. 

2.  I will  now  proceed  to  state  these  laws  in  accordance 
with  the  views  of  Garga,  Parasara_,  Kasyapa,  Vatsa  and  others 
on  the  subject. 

3.  The  predictions  of  an  astronomer  who  pays  exclusive 
attention,  both  day  and  night  to  the  indications  of  rain  afford- 
ed by  pregnant  clouds^  will  as  little  fail  of  success  as  the  words 
of  Rishis* 

4.  What  science  can  possibly  excel,  in  interest,  the 
science  relating  to  the  prediction  of  rain,  by  a thorough  study 
of  which  one  though  ignorant  in  other  matters  passes  for  a 
great  astrologer  in  this  Iron  Age. 

5.  Somef  say  that  the  days  of  the  appearance  of  the 
pregnant  clouds  immediately  follow  the  bright  half  of  the  lunar 

month  of  Karttika October  and  November.  This  view  is 

however  not  in  accordance  with  the  views  of  many  writers  on 
the  subject.  We  therefore  will  give  here  the  views  of  Garga 
and  others. 

6.  The  days  on  which  clouds  are  to  be  deemed  pregnant 
commence  from  the  day  when  the  moon  reaches  the  Asterism 

* The  main  idea  in  this  Chapter  is  that  clouds  that  appear  in  certain  sea- 
sons of  the  year  are  to  be  deemed  as  pregnant  clouds  and  that  they  yield  rain 
at  particular  times  and  places. 

t Some ; Siddhasena  and  men  of  his  School. 


15 


114 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  21. 


of  P.  Ashadha*  on  any  of  the  lunar  days^  from  the  first,  of  the 

bright  half  of  the  lunar  month  of  Margasira November 

and  December. 

7.  If  pregnant  clouds  appear  when  the  Moon  is  in  a cer- 
tain Asterism  the  delivery  of  rain  will  occur  195  days  after, t 
when  the  Moon  will  be  in  the  same  Asterism. 

8.  Clouds  conceiving  during  the  bright  half  will  be  de- 
livered during  the  dark  half  of  a lunar  month  and  clouds  con- 
ceiving during  the  dark  half  will  be  delivered  during  the 
bright  half.  Also  clouds  conceiving  during  the  day  will  be 
delivered  at  night  and  clouds  conceiving  at  night  will  be 
delivered  during  the  day;  also  clouds  conceiving  in  the  twi- 
lisfht  of  the  morning  will  be  delivered  in  the  twilight  of  the 
evening  and  clouds  conceiving  in  the  twilight  of  the  evening 
will  be  delivered  in  the  twilight  of  the  morning. ^ 

9.  Clouds  that  conceive  in  the  bright  and  dark  halves 

of  the  month  of  Margasira November  and  December  and 

in  the  bright  half  of  Pousha — • — December  and  January — ■ 
will  be  delivered  of  rain  respectively  in  the  dark  half  of 

Jyeshtha May  and  June — and  in  the  bright  and  dark 

halves  of  Ashadha ’June  and  July;  but  the  fall  of  rain  in 

these  cases  will  only  be  moderate;  and  clouds  that  conceive  in 

the  dark  half  of  Pousha  will  be  delivered  of  rain  in  the  bright 
half  of  Sravana July  and  August. 

10.  Clouds  that  conceive  in  the  bright  half  of  Magha— 
January  and  February, — will  be  delivered  of  rain  in  the  dark 
half  of  Sravana  and  those  that  conceive  in  the  dark  half  of 

* P.  Ashadha  or  the  first  quarter  of  U.  Ashadha  according  to  commen- 
tator. 

f i.  e.,  fully  7 months  after,  as  the  siderial  period  of  the  moon  is  exactly 
27  days,  7 hours,  43  minutes  11'4  seconds.  This  Stanza  enables  us  to  determine 
the  very  day  of  the  occurrence  of  rain. 

J The  Commentator  adds : clouds  conceiving  at  mid-day  will  be  delivered 
at  mid-night  and  vice  versa.  In  all  these  cases  the  interval  between  conception 
and  delivery  is  of  course  195  days.  This  stanza  enables  us  to  determine  the 
very  hour  of  the  occurrence  of  rain>fall. 


GII.  21.] 


BRIHAT  SAMIIITA. 


115 


Magha  will  be  delivered  in  the  bright  half  of  Bhadrapada — ' 
August  and  September- 

11.  Clouds  that  conceive  in  the  bright  half  of  Phalguna 
— February  and  March — will  be  delivered  of  rain  in  the  dark 
half  of  Bhadrapada  and  those  that  conceive  in  the  dark  half 
of  Phalguna  will  be  delivered  in  the  bright  half  of  Aswayuja 
— September  and  Octaber. 

12*  Clouds  that  conceive  in  the  bright  half  of  Chitra 
— March  and  April — v^ill  be  delivered  of  rain  in  the  dark  half 
of  Aswayuja  and  those  that  conceive  in  the  dark  half  of  Chitra 
will  be  delivered  in  the  bright  half  of  Karttika — October  and 
November.* 

13.  Clouds  that  conceive  in  the  East  will  be  delivered 
in  the  west  and  clouds  that  conceive  in  the  west  will  be 
delivered  in  the  east*  The  same  rule  holds  with  regard 
to  the  other  directions  and  also  with  respect  to  the  winds 
that  appear  both  at  the  times  of  conception  and  delivery. -|- 

14*  If  gentle  and  agreeable  winds  blow  from  the  north, 
north-east  and  east,  if  the  sky  should  be  clear,  if  the  Sun  and 
Moon  should  appear  surrounded  by  bright,  white,  thick  halos  *, 

15.  If  the  clouds  should  appear  huge,  bright,  dense,  or 
shaped  like  a needle  or  a sword  and  red,  if  the  sky  should  ap- 
pear dark  as  the  crow’s  egg,  if  the  Moon  and  Stars  should 
appear  white ; 

16.  If  the  twilight  should  be  marked  by  the  rainbow,  by 
the  low  rumbling  roar  of  thunder,  by  lightning,  by  the  mock 
sun  or  parhelion,  if  it  be  of  agreeable  appearance,  if  groups  of 
birds  and  animals  should  sound  sweet  music  from  the  north, 
north-east  and  east ; 


* These  stanzas  enable  us  to  determine  the  particular  fortnight  of  the  fall 
of  rain. 

t This  stanza  enables  us  to  determine  the  direction  of  the  fall  of  rain. 


116 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  21. 


11*  If  the  planets  should  appear  of  large  bright  disc,  if 
their  course  should  lie  to  the  north  of  the  constellations,  if 
they  should  be  free  from  abnormal  affections,  if  the  trees 
should  grow  well  and  be  free  from  disease  ; if  men  and  cattle 
should  be  happy ; 

18.  These  are  indications  of  a healthy  pregnancy ; and 
in  such  cases  the  clouds  will  yield  abundance  of  rain.  We 
will  now  proceed  to  state  the  indications  of  a healthy  preg- 
nancy of  rain-clouds  in  the  several  seasons  of  the  year. 

19.  In  the  months  of  Margasira  and  Pousha,  if  the  sky 
should  appear  very  red  just  before  sun-rise  and  just  after  sun- 
set j if  the  clouds  should  appear  surrounded  by  halos ; if  the 
month  of  Margasira  should  be  found  to  be  very  cold  and  if 
the  fall  of  snow  should  be  excessive  in  the  month  of  Pousha  ; 

20.  In  the  month  of  Magha,  if  strong  winds  should 
blow,  if  the  discs  of  the  Sun  and  Moon  should  be  dimmed  by 
the  fall  of  snow,  if  at  rising  and  setting  the  Sun  should  be  hid 
by  clouds  and  it  be  then  exceedingly  cold  j 

21*  In  the  month  of  Phalguna  if  strong  and  violent  winds 
should  blow,  if  fine  clouds  should  be  found  marching  from 
place  to  place,  if  broken  or  imperfect  halos  should  appear  in 
the  sky,  if  the  sun  should  appear  of  the  color  of  gold  or  red ; 

22.  In  the  month  of  Chitra  if  the  sky  should  be  marked 
by  winds,  clouds,  rain  and  halos;  in  the  month  of  Vaisakha  if 
there  should  be  rain,  lightning  and  thick  clouds,  in  all  these 
cases  it  may  be  concluded  that  the  pregnancy  of  the  clouds  is 
a healthy  one. 

23.  If  the  pregnant  clouds  should  be  of  the  color  of 
pearls  or  silver  or  of  the  color  of  the  bark  of  the  Tamala* 
tree  or  of  the  blue  lotus  or  of  colly rium,  they  will  yield 
abundance  of  rain. 


* Tamala:  a tree  with  a very  dark  bark  and  with  white  blossoms' 
Xantho  chymus  Pictorius, 


CH.  21.] 


BKIHAT  SAMIIITA. 


117 


24*  If  the  pregnant  clouds  should  be  exposed  to  the  hot 
rays  of  the  Sun,  if  they  should  be  accompanied  by  gentle  winds 
and  appear  as  if  covered  by  drops  of  rain,  they  will  yield 
abundance  of  rain. 

25*  If  the  appearance  of  the  pregnant  clouds  should  be 
marked  by  meteoric  falls,  by  thunder-bolts,  dust-storms  and 
the  appearance  of  mock-fires  about  the  horizon  ; or  if  at 
the  time  of  such  appearance,  clouds  should  present  the  shape 
of  cities  and  towers  and  if  spots  should  appear  in  the  solar  disc 
or  if  there  should  be' planetary  conjunctions  at  the  time;  or, 

26.  If  there  should  be  a shower  of  blood,  if  halos  or 
rain-bows  should  appear  in  the  sky,  if  there  should  be  a solar, 
or  lunar  eclipse  at  the  time,  in  all  these  cases  the  pregnancy 
will  miscarry. 

27.  If  the  symptoms  of  a healthy  pregnancy  assigned 
for  the  several  seasons  of  the  year  should  fail,  the  pregnancy 
will  miscarry  and  the  clouds  will  yield  little  or  no  rain, 

28.  Clouds  that  conceive  when  the  Moon  is  in  the  as- 
terisms  of  P*  Bhadrapada,  U.  Bhadrapada,  P.  Ashadha  and  U. 
Ashadha  and  Rohini  will  yield  abundance  of  rain. 

29.  Clouds  that  conceive  when  the  Moon  is  in  the 
asterisms  of  Satabhishak,  Aslesha,  Ardra,  Swati  and  Magha 
will  yield  rain  continuously  for  several  da3^s  unless  the  preg- 
nancy should  have  suffered  in  any  of  the  ways  stated  above* 

30.  Clouds  that  conceive  when  the  Moon  is  in  any  one 
of  the  five  asterisms  referred  to  in  the  last  stanza  in  the  six 
months  from  Margasira  to  Vaisakha,  will  yield  rain  respec- 
tively for  8,  6,  16,  24,  20,  and  3 days  continuously.* 

31.  If  either  the  Sun  or  Moon  should  be  attended  by  a 
malefic  planet  at  the  time  of  conception,  the  subsequent 
rain-fall  will  be  marked  by  hail,  thunder,  and  fish.  If,  on  the 
other  hand,  either  the  Sun  or  Moon  should  be  attended  by  or 

* This  enables  us  to  determine  the  duration  of  rain. 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


118 


[CH.  21« 


within  view  of  a benefic  planet  at  the  time  of  conception  the 
rainfall  will  be  abundant* 


32.  If  there  should  be  fall  of  heavy  rain  at  the  time  of 
conception,  the  pregnancy  will  miscarry  and  there  will  be  no 
I’ain.  This  will  be  the  case  only  when  the  quantity  of  rain* 
fall  exced  one-eighth  of  a Drona*^ 

o3*  If,  owing  to  adverse  planetary  influences,  the  preg- 
nant clouds  should  fail  to  yield  rain  at  the  seasons  describ- 
ed, they  will  do  so  at  the  period  of  the  next  conception  and 
in  such  a case  the  rain  will  be  marked  by  a shower  of  hail* 

34.  If  milch  animals  should  remain  unmilked  for  a long 
period,  the  milk  will  become  solidified  ; so,  the  rain  which  the 
clouds  fail  to  yield  at  the  proper  season  becomes  congealed 
after  a time  in  the  sky. 

35.  If  a healthy  pregnancy  should  be  established  in  the 
five  ways  given  below  (vide  stanza  37),  the  rainfall  will  extend 
to  100  Yojanas  (500  miles)  all  round.  If  one  of  the  five 
indications  be  wanting,  the  extent  will  be  reduced  to  one-half ; 
if  two  should  be  wanting,  to  one-fourth,  and  so  forth. 

36.  If  the  pregnancy  should  be  marked  by  all  the  five 
indications,  the  quantity  of  subsequent  rain-fall  will  be  a Drona; 
if  in  such  a case  the  rain  should  be  attended  by  strong  winds, 
the  quantity  will  only  be  3 Adhahas\ ; if  by  lightning,  the 
quantity  will  be  6 Adhakas : if  then  the  sky  should  be  over- 
cast by  clouds,  the  quantity  of  rain-fall  will  be  9 Adhakas ; 
if  there  should  be  the  roar  of  thunder  then  12  Adhakas  of  rain 
will  fall* 

37*  The  signs  of  a healthy  pregnancy  are  winds,  rain, 
lightning,  roar  of  thunder  and  the  appearance  of  clouds  at 
the  time  of  conception;  in  such  a case  the  subsequent  rain- 


* A Dx’ona  is  equal  to  200  pBalas.  The  stanza  implies  that  the  measure- 
ment should  ho  made  by  means  of  a rain-gauge  which  ought  to  be  a circular 
vessel  with  a mouth,  a cubit  in  diameter. 

t Adhaka : an  adlialia  is  one-fourth  of  a drona  or  50  phalas. 


CH.  21.] 


BRIIIAT  SAMIIITA. 


119 


fall  will  be  abundant;  but  if  the  rainfall  should  be  excessive 
at  the  time  of  conception,  there  will  only  be  a poor  drizzling 
shower  during  the  rainy  season. 


This  Chapter  enables  us  to  determine  beforehand  the 
time,  duration,  place,  extent,  quantity  and  quality  of  rainfall. 
As  rain  is  a subject  of  vital  importance,  the  value  of  a fore- 
knowledge of  the  agricultural  prospects  of  the  country  can 
never  be  over-estimated.  The  several  civilized  Governments 
will  therefore  do  well,'  having  a due  respect  for  the  wisdom  of 
the  ancient  Hindu  Sages,  to  call  upon  their  Meteorological 
departments  to  study  t^his  Chapter  and  Chapters  22  to  28  and 
submit  a report  on  the* future  prospects  of  the  land,  by  way  of 
testing  the  truth  of  the  statements  above  made*  Government 
Astronomers  may  also  be  directed  to  submit  similar  reports  on 
the  future  condition  of  the  Earth  and  of  mankind  at  large, 
judging  from  the  various  phases  of  the  Moon,  course  and  con- 
junctions of  the  planets,  the  appearance  of  comets  and  so  forth. 
Tills  appears  to  us  to  be  a wiser  mode  of  governing  the  country 
than  being  taken  by  surprise  by  the  actual  occurrence  of  famine 
and  drought  and  then  trying  to  move  Heaven  and  Earth  to 
redress  their  miseries — 'iiot  unlike  the  Turk  Athlete  who, 
unable  to  anticipate  the  impending  blow  of  his  adversary, 
raises  his  weapon  in  its  direction  only  after  it  has  fallen  heavily 
every  time. 


120 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  22. 


CHAPTER  XXII. 

On  Dharana 

OR 

Rain  Support  Days. 

1.  The  four  days  commencing  from  the  eighth  day  in 
the  light  half  of  the  month  of  Jyeshta — May  and  June — 
are  known  as  Vayu  Dharana  Days,  that  is,  days  from  the 
winds  that  blow  on  which  the  nature  of  the  health  of  the 
pregnancy  of  the  rain-clouds  might  be  determined.  If  the 
winds  should  be  gentle  and  agreeable  and  then,  if  the  sky 
should  be  covered  by  fine,  bright  clouds,  there  will  be  good 
rain. 

2.  But  if,  in  the  said  light  half  of  Jyeshta,  there  should 
be  a fall  of  rain  in  the  four  days  when  the  Moon  passes 
through  the  asterism  of  from  Swati  to  Jyeshta,  there  will  be 
rain  in  the  rainy  season — from  Sravana  to  Karttika — August 
to  November. 

3.  If  the  four  Dharana  days  should  be  exactly  alike  in 
their  indications,  there  will  be  happiness  in  the  land  ; if  dif- 
ferent from  one  another,  there  will  be  misery,  and  there  will 
also  be  fear  from  robbers ; we  have  the  recorded  opinion  of 
Vasishta  to  the  same  effect. 

4.  If  on  the  Dharana  days  the  Sun  and  Moon  should  be 
covered  by  wet  clouds  attended  by  lightning  and  dust-storm, 
there  will  be  good  rain. 

5.  If  on  the  Dharana  days  the  sky  should  be  marked  by 
beautiful  lightning  alternately  appearing  in  opposite  benefic 
quarters,  every  species  of  crop  will  thrive. 

6.  If  on  the  same  days  there  should  fall  a shower  of 
rain  attended  by  dust-storm  or  if  children  should  in  play  blow 
through  their  mouths  or  birds  sing  or  play  in  the  dust  or  in 
water;  if  the  halos  round  the  Sun  and  Moon  should  appear 
bright  and  not  much  disfigured  there  will  be  rain  and  all 
crops  will  thrive. 


cii-  23.] 


BRIIIAT  SAMiriTA. 


121 


7.  If,  on  tlio  Dll;  iraini  days,  the  (loads  should  appeal* 
heaiitifnl  and  collected  together  with  tludr  coiirso  from  left  to 
ri^hr,  there  will  be  immediate  rain  and  such  rain  will  be  ex- 
ceedingly useful  to  the  crops* 


CHAPTER  xxnr. 

On  Rain. 

1.  Judging  fi'otn  the  rain  that  falls  on  the  days  when  the 
Moon  passes  from  the  asterism  of  P.  Ashadha  to  that  of  Mnla 
in  the  lunar  month  of  Jyeshta  and  after  the  full-moon,  an 
astronomer  should  predict  the  agricultural  condition  of  the 
country  as  well  as  the..q('uantity  of  rain-fall  in  the  coming  rainy 
season. 

2.  Falling  rain  should  be  collected  in  a vessel  with  a cir- 
cular mouth,  a cubit  in  diameter  and  the  collected  rain  should 
be  measured  with  a vessel  whoso  capacity  is  an  Adhaka,  which 
is  equal  to  50  phalams.* 

3*  There  will  be  continuous  rain  for  as  many  days  of  tlie 
Moon’s  course  from  P«  Ashadha  onwards  (in  the  rainy  season) 
as  the  number  of  asterisms,  through  which,  when  the  Moon 
passes,  a shower  of  rain  occurs  just  marking  the  Farth,  from 
the  same  asterism  of  P.  Ashadha  in  the  lunar  month  of  Jyeshta, 
or  there  will  be  rain  for  as  many  days  as  the  number  of  rain 
drops  sticking  to  the  edge  of  the  blades  of  grass.  The  quan- 
tity of  subsequent  rain-fall  can  also  be  ascertained  from  such 
rain.f 

4.  Some  writers  sa}^  that  the  subsequent  rain-fall  will  be 
confined  to  the  spot  where  the  first  shower  falls;  others  say 
that  the  extent  of  the  subsequent  rain-fail  will  be  10  Yojanas — • 
50  miles — all  round;  but  according  to  Garga,  Parasara  and 
Yasishta  the  extent  is  12  Yojanas. 

* Parasara  defines  an  Adliaka  to  be  tlie  capacity  of  a vessel  with  a circular 
mouth  20  inches  in  diameter  and  whose  depth  is  8 inches. 

t If  such  first  shower  should  be  excessive  there  will  be  no  rain  in  the  rainy 
season. 

IG 


122 


BRIIIAT  SAMIIITA. 


[Cfl.  23* 


5.  If  there  should  be  raiu  wheu  tlie  Moon  passes  through 
certain  asterisms  from  P.  Ashadha  to  Mula  in  the  lunar  month 
of  Jyeshta  then  there  will  also  be  rain  when  the  Moon  passes 
through  the  same  asterisms  in  the  rainy  season.  If  there 
should  be  no  rain  in  the  month  of  Jyeshta,  there  will  be  no 
rain  in  the  rainy  season. 

6.  If  tliere  should  be  a fall  of  rain  when  the  Moon  passes 
through  the  asterisms  of  Hasta,  P.  Ashadha,  Mrigaseerslnij 
Chitra,  Revati  and  Sravishta  in  the  month  of  Jyeshta,  there 
will  fall  16  dronas  of  rain  in  the  coming  rainy  season.  If  there 
should  be  a fall  when  the  Moon  passes  through  Satabhishak, 
Jyeshta  and  Swati,  in  the  month  of  Jyeshta,  the  subsequent 
rain-fall  will  be  4 dronas.  If  there  should  bo  a fall  when  the 
Moon  passes  through  Krittika,  the  quantity  of  subsequent  rain- 
fall will  be  10  dronas. 

7.  If  there  should  be  a fall  of  rain  when  the  Moon  passes 
through  Sravana,  Magha,  Anuradha,  Bharani  and  Mula,  the 
quantity  of  subsequent  rain-fall  will  bo  14  dronas.  If  when 
through  P.  Phalguni,  the  quantity  will  be  25  dronas;  if  wheu 
through  Punarvasu,  the  quantity  will  be  20  dronas. 

8*  If  there  should  be  a fall  of  rain,  when  the  Moon  passes 
through  the  asterisms  of  Visakha  and  U.  Ashadha  in  the  lunar 
month  of  Jyeshta,  the  quantity  of  subsequent  rain-fall  will  be 
20  dronas;  if  when  through  Aslesha,  the  quantity  will  be  13 
dronas;  if  when  through  IJ.  Bhadrapada,  U.  Phalguni  and 
Rohini,  the  quantity  will  be  25  dronas* 

9.  If  there  should  be  a fall  of  rain  when  the  Moon  passes 
through  the  asterisms  of  P.  Bhadrapada  and  Pushya  in  the 
lunar  month  of  Jyeshta,  the  quantity  of  rain-fall  in  the  coming 
winter  will  be  15  dronas  ; if  when  through  Aswani,  the 
quantity  will  be  12  dronas;  if  when  through  Ardra,  it  will 
be  18  d ronas*  In  all  the  above  cases  the  subsequent  rain-fall 
depends  upon  the  asterisms  remaining  unaffected  by  comets. 


CM.  24.] 


BUIHAT  SAMHITA. 


123 


meteors  and  the  like  from  tlie  month  of  Jyeshta  to  the  rainy 
season. 

10.  If  tlie  asterisms  slionlJ  suffer  by  the  meeting  to- 
gether in  them  of  the  Sun^  Saturn  and  Ketu  (desceudiug  node 
of  the  Moon)  or  by  tlie  course  of  Mars  througli  them  or  by 
meteoiic  falls^  comets  or  planetary  conjunctions_,  there  will  be 
neither  rain  nor  prosperity  in  the  land  ; but  if  beueffc  planets 
should  pass  through  the  asterisms  or  if  the  asterisms  should 
remain  unaffected  in  any  of  the  ways  described  above,  mankind 
will  be  Inippy.  ' 

eil AIMER  XXIV. 

On  Roiiini  Yoga.# 

1.  The  grove  of  Mount  ^leru  was  rendered  agreeable  by 
the  humming  of  bees  sipping  honey  from  the  flowers  of  trees 
growing  between  rocks  of  gold,  by  the  sweet  music  of  birds  at 
play  and  by  the  melodious  voice  of  the  Sylvan  fairies* 

2.  It  was  in  such  a grove  of  Mount  Meru — the  abode 
of  the  Devas — that  Narada  communicated  to  Brihaspati  the 
laws  of  Rohiui  Yoga  ; the  same  laws  have  since  been  taught 
by  Garga,  Parasara,  Kasyapa  and  Maya  to  numbers  of  their 
disciples. 

3.  Having  examined  these  truths  I purpose  to  write  a 
brief  treatise  on  the  same  adopting  the  same  views*! 

4*  It  is  part  of  an  astronomer’s  duty  to  examine  the 
weather  indications  on  the  day  when  the  Moon  passes  througli 

* Eoliini  Yoga  : This  means  the  period  of  a day  when  the  moon  passes  through 
the  asterism  of  Rohini  in  the  dark  half  of  the  lunar  month  of  Ashadha. 

t These  prefatory  remarks  clearly  shew  that  what  follow  are  important  scien- 
tific truths  in  the  eyes  of  Hindu  astronomers  ; that  the  weather  indications  of  one 
single  day  in  a year  should  form  the  subject  of  so  much  calculation  with  tho 
Hindus  in  determining  the  future  agricultural  prospect  of  tho  land  while  to  tho 
inexperienced  eye  of  a Western  man  of  science,  the  day  appears  as  indifferent  or 
otherwise  as  any  other  day  of  tho  year  argues  that  modern  science  is  still  far  behind 
in  her  investigations  of  the  laws  of  nature, 


124 


BUI  HAT  SAM  El  I TA. 


[cH.  24. 


the  asterism  of  Uohini  ia  the  dark  half  of  tlie  iiinni*  inoat’a  of 
Ashadlia — June — Jnl}’ — and  to  predict  scientifically  the  future 
condition  of  land. 

5.  The  astronomer  should  bo  able  to  determine  before- 
hand the  time  of  the  Mootds  entry  into  the  asterism  of  Uohini. 
I have  treated  of  this  subject  in  my  work  on  astronomy.  The 
astronomer  must  base  his  conclusions  on  the  nature  of  the 
effects  of  Uohini  yoga,  on  the  size,  gloss,  color  and  course  of 
the  Moon  and  by  the  appearance  of  any  comets  or  fall  of  ajiy 
meteors  at  the  time. 

6.  The  astronomer  shall  choose  a suitable  station  imme- 
diately to  the  North-east  of  his  town,  shall  spend*  3 days  in 
the  worship  of  fire,t  shall  draw  out  a figure  of  the  constellations 
with  the  planets  in  them  and  shall  worship  it  with  flowers,  per- 
fumed smoke  and  by  gifts  and  sacrifices. ^ 

7.  He  shall  also  prepare  a raised  platform,  cover  it  with 
Kusa  grass  and  place  in  the  four  points — N.  E.  S.  and  W — 
four  pots§  filled  with  water,  precious  stones  and  medicinal 
herbs,  covering  the  mouths  with  tender  leaves. 

8.  He  shall  then  procure  every  species  of  seed,  charm 
them  by  means  of  the  Mahavrita  Mantra  (referred  to  in  the 
Adharvana  Veda,)  wet  them  with  water  rendered  pure  by  con- 
tact with  gold  and  kusa  grass  and  gently  pub  them  layer  over 
la3mr  in  a broad  mouthed  central  pot  and  shall  perform  homa 
in  honor  of  the  Gods  Vayu  (the  wind),  Varuna  (rain),  and 
Soma  (the  Moon.) 

9.  He  shall,  beforehand,  ascertain  and  mark  out  the 
several  points  of  the  compass  and,  planting  vertically  a flag 
staff — the  stick  being  straight  and  thrice  the  length  of  the 

* Fasting  according  to  Garga. 

t By  Gayatri  lioraa  according  to  the  same  authority. 

J According  to  Garga,  the  astronomer  should  observe  these  religious  ceremo- 
nies on  the  8th  lunar  day  of  the  dark  half  of  Ashadha.  • 

§lho  pots  represent  from  the  North  the  four  months  from  Sravana  to 
Karlika. 


cii-  24.] 


BUJliAT  SAMlllTA. 


125 


cloth  wliich  shall  bo  thin,  fbie  and  of  black  color — he  shall 
ascertain  the  dii-ection  of  the  wind  at  the  time  when  the  Moon 
enters  the  asterisin  of  llohini. 

10.  lie  shall  divide  the  day  on  which  the  iMoon  enters 
the  asterisrn  of  Rohini  into  8 equal  pai-ts  (of  3 hours  each) 
commencing  from  snn-rlse — the  parts  representino-  severally 
the  ei^ht  fortnights  of  the  four  months  of  the  rainy  seascni 
fi’om  Si'avana.  to  Kartika  ; and  he  shall  determine  on  which 
month  or  fortnight  and  how  long  there  will  be  rain  judging 
from  the  direction  afid  duration  of  the  wind.  If  tlie  wind 
should  blow  from  left,  to  right  there  will  be  pj’osperity  in  the 
land  j if  it  should  blow-  in  some  fixed  direction,  people  living 
in  that  direction  will  be  happy.* 

11.  After  the  ^loon  has  passed  through  Rohini,  the  astro- 
nomer shall  examine  the  seeds  ; those  that  bear  sprouts  will 
thrive  well  in  the  year  and  the  quantity  that  will  be  harvested 
will  be  in  proportion  to  the  quantity  that  have  sprouted,  in  the 

case  of  each  species  of  seed. 

* 

12.  After  the  Moon  has  passed  through  the  asterisrn  of 
Rohini,  if  there  should  be  heard  in  every  direction  the  sweet 
sound  of  birds  and  of  animals,  if  the  sky  should  be  clear  and 
the  wind  agreeable  there  will  be  prosperity  in  tlie  land.  AMe 
shall  now  proceed  to  state  the  effects  of  winds  and  clouds. 

13.  If,  on  the  Rohini-yoga  day,  huge  clouds,  serpent-like 
in  shape,  should  appear  white-black  in  certain  paids  of  the  sk}^, 
white  in  certain  parts  and  black  in  certain  other  parts  with  the 
lightning  for  their  tongues  and  if  the  clouds  should  be  collect- 
ed and  appear  twisted  together  j 

14.  If  they  should  appear  of  the  color  of  the  nut  of  the 
lotus,  if  their  neighbourhood  should  be  illumined  by  the  light 
of  the  Sun,  if  clouds  of  various  hues  should  fill  the  sky  or  if 

* According  to  Garga  the  day  alone,  and  not  the  night,  should  be  divided  into 
four  equal  parts  to  represent  the  four  months  of  the  rainy  season  and  the  observa- 
tion should  also  be  made  during  the  day. 


BRIHAT  SAM  II  IT  A. 


126 


[cH.  24. 


they  should  appear  of  the  color  of  the  beC;  of  crimson  or  of 
the  flower  of  Kimsuka 


15.  If  tlie  sky  sliould  be  full  of  black  clouds  and  if  it  be 
marked  by  lightuiug  or  beautiful  rainbow  tlius  presenting  the 
appearance  of  a forest  full  of  elephants^  buffaloes  and  wild 
fire ; 

16.  If  the  clouds  appear  like  black  mountains  or  rocks 
01’  if  their  color  should  resemble  that  of  the  snow,  pearls,  couch 
shells  and  the  Moon  ; 


17.  Or  if  the  clouds  should  be  like  elephants with 

the  lightning  for  the  rope  of  gold,  the  flying  cranes  for  the 
tips  of  their  tusks,  the  rain  for  their  juice  (ichor),  their  sides 
moving  like  the  sides  of  the  elephants,  with  the  rainbow  for 
their  digs  of  various  hues,  their  dark  color  resembling  that  of 
the  bai'k  of  the  tamala  tree  and  the  bee; 

18.  If,  immediately  before  sun-rise  and  after  sun-set  the 
clouds  should  appear  of  the  color  of  the  blue  lotus  and  with 
the  lightning,  resemble  the  dark  Vishnu  dressed  in  cloths  of 
gold  ; 

19.  If  there  should  be  heard  the  sound  of  the  peacock, 
of  chataka  and  of  the  frog,  together  with  the  roar  of  thunder- 
clouds filling  the  whole  of  the  visible  sky ; 

20.  If  the  sky  should  be  overcast  by  clouds  as  described 
above  for  3 days  or  2 days  or  a single  day,  there  will  be  abund- 
ance of  rain  and  mankind  will  be  happy. 

21.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  clouds  should  be  of  dis- 
agreeable appearance,  of  small  size  and  dispersed  by  the  wind 
or  if  they  should  bo  of  the  shape  of  the  camel,  the  crow,  dead 
bodies,  the  monkey  and  the  likef  and  if  they  should  at  the 
same  time  remain  mute,  there  will  be  no  rain  and  mankind 
will  not  be  happy. 


* Kimsuka:  tlio  tree  Butea  Frondosa,  a tree  bearing  beautiful  red  blossoms 
known  in  Tamil  as  uedrrsi-. 

t Bike  rats,  dogs,  &c,,  according  to  commentator. 


cir.  24.] 


DRinAT  SAMEIITA. 


127 

22.  on  tlie  Roliini  Yoga  day,  the  sky  should  be  clear 
and  without  clouds  and  the  Sun  exceedingly  hot,  there  will  be 
rain  iu  the  rainy  season.  If  on  the  night  of  the  Yoga  day,  the 
sky  with  its  glittering  stars  should  resemble  a tank  with  its 
lilies,  there  will  also  be  rain. 

23.  If  on  the  Uohini  Yoga  diiy,  clouds  should  lirst  appear 
iu  the  East,  crops  will  thrive  well.  If  they  should  appear  iu 
the  South-east,  desti'uctive  fires  will  afflict  mankind;  if  iu  the 
South,  the  crops  will  suffer  blight;  if  in  the  South-east,  one 
lialf  of  the  crops  wilj  suffer  and  if  in  the  West,  there  will  be 
good  rain. 

24-  If  the  clouds, should  appear  in  the  North-west  there 
will  be  rain  in  some  places  and  such  rain  will  be  attended  by 
the  wind  ; if  they  should  appear  in  the  North,  there  will  be 
good  rain  and  if  in  the  North-east,  crops  will  thrive.  The 
same  effects  are  to  be  assigned  to  the  wind  blowing  from  the 
several  quarters* 

25.  If  on  the  Rohini  Yoga  day  there  should  be  meteoric 
falls,  lightning,  thunder-bolts,  mock-fires,  and  cometai-y  and 
other  unusual  appearances,  or  if  there  should  be  earthquakes 
or  if  the  sounds  of  birds  and  animals  should  be  hoarse  and 
disagreeable  there  will  be  no  rain  and  mankind  will  not  be 
happy. 

26.  If,  on  examining,  the  waters  of  the  four  pots  from 
the  north  representing  the  four  months  from  Sravaua  should 
be  found  full  there  will  be  good  rain  in  the  several  months;  if 
in  any  pot  the  water  should  have  oozed  out  completely,  there 
will  be  no  rain  in  the  month  it  represents  and  if  incompletely, 
there  will  be  a proportionate  decrease  in  the  quantity  of  the 
rain-fall. 


27.  If  it  should  be  desired  to  ascertain  the  fate  of  any 
sovereign  or  country  during  the  year,  there  should  be  placed 
fresh  pots  each  to  represent  a sovereign  or  a country.  If,  on 
examining,  any  of  these  pots  should  be  found  split  or  broken 


128 


BRIIIAT  S AM  HIT  A-. 


[cir.  21. 


the  sovereign  or  the  counti-y  represented  will  suffer  miseries  ; 
if  the  water  should  have  disappeared^  then  also  they  will  suffer 
and  if  full;  they  will  be  hnppy. 

28.  If  the  course  of  the  Moon  should  lie  to  the  South  of 
tlie  stars  of  the  Uohiui  group  whether  near  or  far;*  mankind 
will  be  afflicted  witli  miseries. 

29«  If  the  Moon  should  pass  just  touching  the  Northern- 
most star  of  the  group,  there  will  be  good  rain,  bub  there  will 
also  be  miseries  ; if  she  should  pass  to  the  north  of  tlie  group 
and  not  in  contact  with  it  there  will  be  abundant  rain  and 
mankind  will  be  happy. 

80.  If  the  Moon  should  enter  the  Rohini  group  and  p.ass 
through  its  centre,  mankind  will  be  rendered  helpless  and, 
troubled  by  the  cries  of  children  for  food,  they  will  travel  to 
foreign  lands,  drinking  the  waters  of  muddy  ‘pools  from  their 
broken  bowls. 

31.  If  on  the  night  of  the  Rohini  Yoga  day  the  Moon 
should  rise  firstf  and  the  group  immediately  next  after  it,  there 
will  be  happiness  in  the  land  and  women  v^ill  become  amorous 
and  subject  to  the  influence  of  men. 

32*  If  on  the  other  hand  the  Rohini  group  should  rise 
first  and  the  Moou  next  after  it,|  men  will  become  amorous 
aud  subject  to  the  influence  of  women. 

33«  If  on  the  night  of  the  Yoga  day  the  Moon  at  rising 
should  be  found  to  the  South-east  of  the  group,  mankind  will 
suffer  miseries ; if  she  should  be  found  to  the  South-west  of 
the  group,  crops  will  suffer  injuries  in  various  ways;  if  on  the 
West  and  North-west  the  growth  of  the  crops  will  be  moderate; 
and  if  in  the  North-east  the  crops  will  thrive. 

* This  will  unusually  be  the  case  astronomically,  according  to  commentator. 

t That  is,  if  the  Moon’s  conjunction  with  Rohini  should  take  place  imme- 
diately after  rising. 

X That  is,  if  the  conjunction  should  have  taken  place  Immediately  before 
rising. 


cii.  25.] 


BRIIIAT  SAMIUTA. 


120 


34* * * §  If  on  the  Yoga  day,  the  Moon  should  pass  in  contact 
with  the  Yogatara*  (junction  star)  of  the  group,  mankind  will 
be  tormented  with  various  fears;  if  the  Yogatara  should  be 
eclipsed  by  the  Moon,  the  reigning  sovereign  will  be  assassinat- 
ed by  a woman. 

35-  If,  towards  nightfall,  on  the  Rohini  Yoga  day,  when 
cattle,  led  out  in  the  morning,  re-enter  the  town,  the  first 
animal  so  entering  should  be  either  an  ox  or  a goat,  there  will 
be  abundant  rain  ; if  it  should  be  an  animal  black-white  in  color 

there  will  be  moderate  rain if  in  the  last  case  the  black 

color  should  predominate  the  rain-fall  will  be  abundant  and  if 
the  white  color  should  .predominate  there  will  be  no  rain.  If 
the  animal  that  enters  first  should  be  of  any  other  color  there 
will  be  slight  rain*! 

36.  If  on  "^the  Rohini  Yoga  day,  the  Moon  should  bo 
rendered  invisible  by  the  intervention  of  thick  clouds,  mankind 
will  suffer  from  severe  diseases ; but  there  will  be  abundant 
rain  and  crops  will  thrive. 


CHAPTER  XXV. 

On  Swati  Yoga.J 

!•  All  that  has  been  said  with  respect  to  Rohini  Yoga 
apply  to  both  Swati  and  Ashadi  Yogas  ;§  but  in  the  present 
chapter  we  shall  only  state  certain  special  effects  connected 
with  Swati  Yoga. 


* Yogatara  : This  is  generallxj  the  brightest  of  the  group. 

t These  views  accord  with  those  of  Garga,  but  Parasara  adds  : 

If  an  elephant,  a horse  or  a chariot  should  enter  the  town  first  in  the 
evening  of  the  Rohini  Yoga  day,  there  will  be  success  in  war;  if  a monkey, 
an  ass.  a camel,  a mnngoose,  a cat  or  a dog  should  so  enter  there  will  be 
troubles.  If  a blind  man  should  enter  fii’st,  there  will  be  fear  from  thunder- 
bolts. 

J Swati  Yoya  ; This  means  the  period  of  a day  when  the  Moon  passes  through 
the  asterism  of  Swati  in  the  month  of  Ashadha. 

§ Vide  Chapter  2G. 


17 


130 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[cii.  25* 


2*  Dividing  both  the  day  and  night  of  the  Swati  Yoga 
day  each  into  three  equal  parts^  if  at  night  there  should  be  a 
fall  of  rain  during  the  first  division^  all  the  crops  will  flourish  ; if 
during  the  second  division,  gingelly,  kidney-bean  and  black- 
gram  will  thrive  and  if  during  the  third  division,  the  crops  of 
Greeshma  will  thrive  and  those  of  Sarat  will  perish. 

3*  If  there  should  be  a fall  of  rain  during  the  first  division 
of  the  day,  there  will  be  abundant  rain  in  winter;  the  same 
remark  applies  to  the  second  and  third  divisions;  but  in  these 
two  cases  worms  and  serpents  will  afflict  mankind.  If  there 
should  be  a fall  of  rain  throughout  the  day  and  night  there 
will  be  uninterrupted  rain  for  several  days  in  winter. 

4.  To  the  due  north  of  Chitra#  there  is  a star  known  as 
Apam  Vatsa.  If  the  moon  should  pass  near  it  mankind  will 
be  happy. 

5.  If  there  should  be  a fall  of  snow  on  the  dark  night  of 
the  seventh  lunar  day  of  the  dark  half  of  the  month  of  Magha 

January  and  February,  or  if  a strong  wind  should  blow 

or  if  dripping  clouds  should  roar  uninterruptedly  or  if  there 
should  bo  constant  lightning  or  if  the  Sun,  Moon  and  Stars 
should  be  wholly  concealed  by  the  clouds,  mankind  will  bo 
happy  and  crops  will  thrive* 

6.  The  same  remarks  apply  to  the  Swati  Yogas  occurring 
in  the  months  of  Phalguna  (February  and  March),  (^.haitra 
(March  and  April)  and  Yaisakha  (April  and  May).  But  of  the 
Swati  Yogas,  that  occurring  in  the  month  of  Ashadha  (June 
and  July)  is  the  most  important. 


* At  a distance  of  about  5®. 


cii*  2C.J 


BRIITA.T  SAMHITA. 


131 


CHAPTER  XX VL 
On  Asiiadiii  Yoga.* 

1.  On  the  day  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterisin  of  U*  Ashadha  in  the  lunar  month  of  Ashadba,  the 
Jyoufcishaka  shall  weigh  quantities  of  all  seeds;  if  on  weigh- 
ing them  again  on  the  next  day^  any  seeds  should  be  found 
to  weigh  more^  those  crops  will  flourish;  if  they  should  be 
found  to  weigh  less^  they  will  not  grow  at  all.  There  are 
Mantras  to  be  addressed  to  the  weighing-machine  while 
weighing. 

o o 

2.  Mi  nerva^  Goddess  of  Truth;  thou  art  deserving  of 
praise*  Thou  art  now  'going  to  show  that  which  is  truth.  0 
Truth;  thou  art  ever  truthful. 

3.  0 Truth  by  whose  might  the  Suu;  the  Moon,  the 
planets  and  the  stars  rise  in  the  East  and  set  in  the  West;  thou 
wilt  show  now, 

4.  That  truth  which  is  in  all  the  VedaS;  that  truth  which 
is  spoken  of  by  those  that  know  Brahma  and  that  truth  which 
is  to  be  found  in  the  three  worlds  ; 

5.  Thou  art  the  daughter  of  Brahma  ; thou  art  sung  as 
Aditya  ; thy  Gotra  (family)  name  is  Kasyapee  and  thy  simple 
name  is  Tula  (weighing-machine.) 

6*  The  Jyoutishaka  shall  take  two  square  pieces  of  white 
silk;  the  side  being  six  inches  long;  and  attach  the  four  ends 
of  each  to  the  ends  of  four  strings  each  ten  inches  long  ; the 
length  of  the  string  attached  to  the  middle  of  the  beam  shall 
be  six  inches. 

7.  He  shall  put  gold  weights  in  the  Southern  (right) 
scale  and  the  several  articles  to  be  weighed  in  the  Northern 


* This  means  the  period  of  a day  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the  asterism 
of  U.  Ashadha  in  the  lunar  month  of  Ashadha — June,  July. 


132 


BRIIIAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  26. 


(left)  scale  ; waters  to  bo  weighed  shall  also  be  pat  into  the 
northern  scale  ; if  well-water  should  be  found  to  weigh  more 
when  weighed  the  next  day,  there  will  be  no  rain  in  winter  ; 
if  rain  water  should  weigh  more  there  will  be  moderate  rain  ; 
if  tank  or  lake  water  should  weigh  more  there  will  be  abun- 
dant rain* 

8*  The  condition  of  elephants  shall  be  determined  by 
(weighing)  their  tusks  ; that  of  cows  and  horses  by  their  hair; 
that  of  princes  by  gold,  that  of  Brahmins  and  others  by  wax  ; 
that  of  countries,  years,  months  and  days  shall  also  be  deter- 
mined by  the  wax,  and  that  of  other  articles  by  the  articles 
themselves. 

9.  Gold  is  the  best  material  for  making  the  beam  of  the 
balance;  silver  is  of  middle  importance  ; if  these  two  cannot 
be  had,  the  beam  may  be  of  blackwood ; it  may  also  be  of  that 
arrow  iron  which  was  employed  in  killing  a man.  The  length 
of  the  beam  shall  be  twelve  inches.* 

10.  That  article  which  should  be  found  to  weigh  less 
when  weighed  again  will  perish  ; that  which  weighs  more  will 
flourish ; that  which  weighs  neither  more  nor  less  will  neither 
flourish  nor  decay.  These  are  the  secret  laws  relating  to  the 
balance  and  these  may  also  be  followed  on  the  occasion  of  the 
liohini  Toga  day*! 

11.  In  the  Swati,  Ashadhi  and  Rohini  Yogas,  if  the 
Moon  should  be  accompanied  by  malefic  planets,  there  will  be 
misery  in  the  land.  If  on  account  of  the  intervention  of  the 
intercalary  lunar  month,  the  Yoga  day  should  occur  twice,  the 
observation  shall  be  made  on  both  the  days  and  the  effect, 
whether  good  or  bad  will  be  doubled. 


* An  incli  is  the  space  covei’ed  over  by  8 grains  of  barley  placed  side  by  side — 
or  that  of  3 grains  of  barley  placed  length-wise.  It  is  also  the  breadth  of  the 
human  finger. 

t Also  on  the  Swati  Yoga  day  according  to  commentator. 


cii.  27.] 


BRIIIAT  SAMIIITA. 


133 


12.  If  the  observations  of  the  three  Yogas  point  to  effects 
of  the  same  character,  the  prediction  may  be  made  without 
hesitation;  but  if  the  effects  are  different,  those  of  Rohini 
Yoga  should  be  adopted. 

13.  If  on  the  Yoga  day  the  wind  should  blow  from  the 
East,  Soth-east,  South,  tfec.,  there  will  be  growth  of  crops,  fear 
from  destructive  fires,  slight  rain,  moderate  rain,  abundant 
rain^  excessive  rain  attended  by  storms,  good  rain,  and  excel- 
lent rain  respectively- 

14-  If  there  should  be  rain  on  the  lunar  day  of  the  dark 
half  immediately  following  the  Ashadhi  Yoga  day  when  the 
Moon  is  in  the  asterism  of  P.  Ashadha,  the  rainy  season  will 
be  a prosperous  one  but  not  otherwise- 

15.  If  on  the  Full-Moon  Ashadhi-Yoga  day,  the  wind 
should  blow  from  the  North-east  after  sunset,  crops  will  flour- 
ish. 


CHAPTER  XXVII. 

On  the  Winds. 

1.  If,  immediately  after  sunset,  and  on  the  Ashadhi  Yoga 
day,  there  should  blow  the  east-wind,  fresh  from  its  contact 
with  the  waves  of  the  east  sea,  warmed  by  the  rays  of  the  set- 
ting Sun  and  cooled  by  the  rays  of  the  rising  Moon,  the  rainy 
season  will  be  marked  by  dark  dense  clouds  in  all  directions ; 
and  the  crops  of  autumn  and  of  spring  will  flourish. 

2.  If  then  there  should  blow  the  South-east  wind  from 
the  Malayachala  hills,  there  will  be  fear  from  destructive  fires 
everywhere  and  the  Earth  will  be  covered  with  the  ashes  of 
objects  consumed  by  such  fires. 

3.  If  then  there  should  blow  the  South-wind  through 
forests  in  the  branches  of  whose  trees  the  monkeys  swing  as 
they  are  moved  by  the  wind,  the  clouds  being  forced  by  the 


134 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[ce.  27. 


windsj  will  yield  as  little  rain  as  the  elephant  yields  the  juice 
of  rut  when  struck  with  the  driver’s  hook  or  a miser  his  wealth 
when  well-beaten. 

4.  immediately  after  sunset  on  the  Ashadhi  Yoga  day, 
there  should  blow  the  South-west  wind,  sweeping  into  the  sea 
the  cardamom  and  clove  fruits,  the  Earth  will  be  filled  with 
the  bones  of  those  that  die  from  want  of  food  and  drink  and 
the  appearance  of  the  Earth  will  resemble  that  of  a young  lady 
just  losing  her  husband- 

5.  If  Hi  en  the  West-wind  should  blow  raising  up  dust- 
clouds  from  the  ground,  crops  will  flourish  ; the  chief  rulers 
will  engage  in  war  and  the  Earth  will  be  covered  with  the 
blood  and  flesh  of  those  that  are  killed  in  battle. 

6* * * §  If,  immediately  after  Sunset  on  the  Ashadhi-Yoga  day, 
the  North-west  wind  should  blow  strong  and  fast,  the  Earth 
will  put  on  a smiling  and  happy  appearance  from  excellent 
rain,  frogs  will  be  heard  croaking  in  all  directions  ; there  will 
be  one  unbroken  scene  of  green  crops  everywhere  as  far  as 
the  eye  can  reach  and  perfect  prosperity  will  reign  over  the 
land* 

7»  If  at  the  time  when  the  Greeshma  season  just  comes 
to  a close*,  the  North  wind  should  blow  charged  with  the 
odour  of  the  fragrant  flowers  of  the  Kadambaf  tree,  the  Earth 
will  be  covered  with  water  from  clouds  whose  various  hues  will 
appear  beautiful  by  the  light  of  lightning,  the  Moon  being 
invisible  at  the  same  time. 

8.  If  the  cool  North-east  wind  should  blow  aloud,  beinof 
felt  agreeable  by  the  Devas  themselves,  and  charged  with  the 
odour  of  the  flowers  of  PunnagaJ  of  Agaru§  and  of  Parijata|| 

* i.  e.,  just  after  sunset  on  the  full  moon  day  of  the  lunar  month  of  Ashadha. 

t The  tree  Nauclea  Kadamha,  a ti’ee  with  orange  colored  fragrant  blossoms. 

J Puniiaga  : name  of  a tree,  Rollevia  Tinctoi’ia  (from  the  blossoms  of  which  a 
yellowish  dye  is  prepared.) 

§ Agaru  : Agellochum,  Amyris  Agallocha  (already  explained), 

II  Parijata  : The  coral  tree. 


cii.  28.] 


BRIIIAT  SAMHITA. 


135 


there  will  be  good  rain  and  crops  will  flourish  ; mankind  will 
be  under  the  protection  of  good  rulers  triumphant  over  their 
enemies. 


CHAPTER  XXVIIL 
On  Immediate  Rain. 

1.  If,  in  the  rainy  season  when  the  astrologer  is  ques- 
tioned about  rain,  the  Moon  should  be  in  one  of  the  watery 
si"ns#  and  if  that  sign  should  at  the  same  time  be  either  the 
rising  sign  or  the  fourth,  the  seventh  or  the  tenth  sign  from  it_, 
it  beino-  then  the  light  half  of  the  month,  there  will  be  abund- 
ance  of  immediate  rain  j if  it  be  the  dark  half  of  the  month 
and  the  Moon  in  one  of  the  watery  signs  and  within  sight  of 
benefic  planets,  there  will  also  be  abundance  of  immediate 
rain  ; if  in  the  hitter  case,  the  Moon  should  be  within  sight  of 
malefic  planets,  there  will  be  slight  rain.  The  same  rules  ap- 
ply to  Venus  as  to  the  Moon« 

2 If  the  questioner,  at  the  time  should  happen  to  touch 
a wet  substance  or  any  substance  one  of  the  meanings  of  whose 
name  is  water  or  if  he  should  be  at  the  time  close  to  water  or 
engaged  in  work  connected  with  water  or  if  at  the  time  the 
word  ^ 'Water’  should  be  heard  from  anybody,  immediate  rain 
may  safely  be  predicted. 

3.  If,  in  the  rainy  season,  the  rising  Sun  should  ap- 
pear dazzling  or  of  the  color  of  molten  gold  or  glossy  or 
bright  as  the  caPs  eye  (gem)  or  if  the  mid-day  Sun  should  be 
felt  exceedingly  hot,  there  will  be  rain  that  day  before  Sun- 
set. 

4.  If,  in  the  rainy  season,  the  water  should  be  without 
flavor  or  the  sky  of  the  color  of  the  cow's  eye  or  clear  and 


* Watery  Signs  : These  are  Kataka  (Cancer),  Kumbha  (Aquarius),  Meena 
(Pisces),  the  latter  half  of  the  Kannya  (Virgo)  and  of  Makara  (Capricoruus). 


136 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  28» 


without  clouds  or  if  salt  should  turn  into  water  or  if  the  color 
of  the  sky  should  be  that  of  the  crow’s  egg  or  if  the  atmos- 
phere should  be  still  and  no  wind  should  blow  or  if  the  fish 
should  be  found  to  jump  from  water  on  the  bank  or  if  the 
frog  should  be  heard  to  croak  incessantly,  there  will  be  imme- 
diate rain. 

5.  If  the  cat  should  be  found  to  scratch  the  ground  with 
its  claws,  if  metallic  dross  should  be  found  to  be  of  bad  smell 
or  if  children  should  erect  banks  and  bridges  in  the  street  with 
earth  out  of  play,  there  will  be  immediate  rain. 

6.  If  mountains  should  appear  black  like  collyrium,  if  the 
caves  should  be  felt  very  warm  or  if  the  lunar  halo  should  ap- 
pear like  the  color  of  the  eye  of  the  cock,  there  will  be  imme- 
diate rain. 

7.  If  the  ant,  when  undisturbed  and  of  its  own  accord, 
should  leave  its  hole  with  its  egg,  if  serpents  should  be  found 
to  copulate  or  to  climb  up  trees,  there  will  be  immediate  rain* 

8.  If  the  blood-sucker  (lacerta  cristata)  should  be  found 
to  stare  at  the  sky  from  the  tops  of  trees,  or  if  cows  should 
raise  up  their  heads  and  look  at  the  Sun  there  will  be  imme- 
diate rain. 

9.  If  the  sheep  should  be  found  reluctant  to  go  out,  if 
they  should  shake  their  ears  or  kick  with  their  legs  or  if  dogs 
should  be  found  to  do  the  same,  there  will  be  immediate  rain. 

10.  If  dogs  should  be  found  to  get  to  the  tops  of  houses, 
if  they  should  look  at  the  sky  all  round,  or  if  during  the  day 
lightning  should  appear  in  the  North-east,  there  will  be  imme- 
diate rain  and  the  Earth  will  be  covered  with  water- 

11.  If  the  Moon  should  be  of  the  color  of  the  eye  of  a 
parrot  or  a dove  or  of  the  color  of  honey  or  if  the  mock-moon 
should  be  green,  there  will  be  immediate  rain. 


cu*  28-] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


137 


12.  If  the  sound  of  thunder  should  be  heard  at  nighty  and 
lightning,  red  and  straight  like  a rod,  should  appear  during 
the  day,  or  if  the  cool  east-wind  should  blow,  there  will  be 
immediate  rain. 

13.  If  the  tender  leaves  of  plants  and  creepers  should  be 

found  to  grow  with  their  heads  pointed  to  the  sky,  if  birds 
should  be  found  to  bathe  in  watery  particles  or  if  serpents 
should  be  found  to  rest  on  grass  blades,  there  will  be  immedi- 
ate rain.  ^ 

14*  If  the  clouds  which  appear  at  sun-rise  or  at  sun-set 
should  be  of  the  color  ojf  the  peacock,  parrot,  the  blue  jay  or 
chataka  (arculus  melanoleucus),  if  they  should  be  as  glossy  as 
the  China  rose  or  the  lotus  or  if  they  should  be  of  the  shape  of 
undulating  waves,  of  mountains,  of  crocodiles,  of  a tortoise,  of 
the  boar  or  of  the  fish,  and  if  they  should  float  layer  over  layer, 
there  will  be  immediate  rain. 

15.  If,  all  round,  the  clouds  should  appear  white  like  chalk 
or  the  moon  and  in  the  centre  black  like  collyrium  or  the  bee 
and  glossy,  if  they  should  be  of  various  shapes  and  dripping 
drops  of  rain  and  presenting  the  appearance  of  a flight  of  steps, 
if  they  should  appear  in  the  East  and  move  towards  the  West 
or  appear  in  the  West  and  move  towards  the  East  there  will 
be  immediate  rain* 

16.  If  at  the  time  of  sun-rise  or  sun-set,  there  should  be 
seen  in  the  sky  the  rainbow,  clouds  rod-like  in  shape,  the  mock- 
sun  or  parhelion  or  the  appearance  known  as  Rohita  (straight 
rainbow),  or  lightning  or  halo,  there  will  be  abundance  of 
immediate  rain. 

' 17.  If  at  the  time  of  sun-rise  or  sun-set  the  sky  should 
be  of  the  color  of  the  wings  of  the  partridge,  or  if  there  should 
be  heard  the  sound  of  birds  at  play,  there  will  be  immediate 
rain  and  such  rain  will  continue  throughout  the  day  and 
night* 


18 


138 


BRIHA.T  SAMHITA* 


[CII.  29. 


18.  If  at  the  time  of  sun-set,  the  white  straight  rays 
ot  the  Sun  should  shoot  out  as  if  they  formed'so  many  out- 
stretched arms  of  the  Western  Ghauts  and  if  clouds  about  the 
horizon  should  then  begin  to  roar,  there  will  be  abundance  of 
rain. 

19.  If,  in  winter,  the  Moon  should  be  in  the  seventh 
house  from  Venus  and  within  view  of  benefic  planets,  or  if  she 
should  be  in  the  9bh,  5th  or  7th  house  from  Saturn  (also  within 
view  of  benefic  planets)  there  will  be  immediate  rain. 

20*  Generally  there  will  be  rain  at  the  periods  of  heliacal 
rising  and  setting  of  the  planets,  planetary  conjunctions,  of 
new  and  full  moons,  when  the  Sun  is  at  the  end  of  his  Ayana 
(course  to  the  North  or  South)  and  when  the  Sun  is  in  the 
asterism  of  Ardra.* 

21.  There  will  be  rain  if  Mercury  and  Venus,  or  Mercury 
and  Jupiter,  or  Venus  and  Jupiter  should  meet;  if  Saturn  and 
Mars  should  meet  and  if  they  should  not  be  accompanied  by 
or  within  view  of  benefic  planets  there  will  be  fear  from  storms 
and  fire* 

22.  If  the  planets  should  be  close  to  the  Sun,  either  all 
to  its  east  or  all  to  its  west  the  rain-fall  will  be  so  great  that 
the  earth  will  be  buried  under  one  sea  of  water. 

CHAPTER  XXIX. 

On  Flowers  and  Plants. 

1»  Judging  from  the  growth  of  the  fruits  and  flowers  of 
trees  and  plants  we  may  determine  beforehand  what  articles 
can  be  had  cheap  and  in  abundance  and  what  crops  will  thrive. 

2.  If  the  Salat  tree  should  bear  fruits  and  flowers,  Ka- 
rama  (white  rice)  will  grow  in  abundance ; if  the  red  Asoka 

* From  about  the  20Ui  of  June  to  the  3rd  of  July. 

t For  an  explanation  of  these  botanical  terms,  Vide  glossary  at  the  end  of 
this  chapter. 


cu.  29.] 


bbihat  samhita. 


139 


should  bear  fruits  and  flowers  red  paddy  will  grow  ; if  the 
Ksheerika. should  bear  fruits  and  flowers  white  paddy  will  grow 
and  if  the  black  Asoka  should  bear  fruits  and  flowers  black 
rice  will  grow* 

3.  The  growth  of  the  Nyagrodha  (the  Banyan  tree)  indi- 
cates the  growth  of  Yava  (barley)  ; the  growth  of  Tinduka  indi- 
cates the  growth  of  the  Shashtyka  rice  ; and  the  growth  of  the 
Aswatta  indicates  the  growth  of  all  crops. 

4*  The  growth  of  the  Jambu  (the  rose  apple)  tree  indi- 
cates the  growth  of  the  gingelly  and  black  gram  ; the  growth 
of  Sireesha  indicates  the' growth  of  the  Kangn  ; the  growth  of 
Madhuka  indicates  the  growth  of  wheat  and  the  growth  of  the 
Saptaparna  indicates  the  growth  of  the  barley. 

5.  The  growth  of  Atimuktaka  (mountain  ebony)  and  that 
of  Kunda  (cassia)  indicate  the  growth  of  Karpasa  (cotton) ; the 
growth  of  Asana  indicates  the  growth  of  Sarshapa  mustard 
(plant)  ; the  growth  of  Badari  (Jajube  tree)  indicates  the 
growth  of  Kuluttha,  and  the  growth  of  Chiribiha  indicates  the 
growth  of  the  Mudga* 

6*  If  the  Atasi  (common  flax),  Vetasa  (the  ratan)  and 
palasa  trees  should  bear  blossoms,  Kodrava  will  thrive  ; if 
Tilaka  should  bear  blossoms,  conch-shells,  pearls  and  silver 
can  be  had  in  abundance  and  if  Inguda  should  bear  blossoms, 
Sana  (hemp)  will  thrive* 

7*  The  growth  of  Hasti  Kama  (castor  oil-tree)  shows  that 
elephants  will  thrive  ; that  of  Aswa  Kama  shows  that  horses 
will  thrive;  that  of  Patala  (trumpet  flower)  shows  that  cows 
will  thrive  and  the  growth  of  plantains  shows  that  goats  and 
sheep  will  thrive. 

8*  If  the  Champaka  should  bear  blossoms,  gold  can  be 
had  in  abundance  ; if  the  Bandhujeevaka  should  bear  blos- 
soms corals  can  be  had  in  abundance,  if  Kuravaka  should  bear 


140 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  29. 


blossoms,  diamonds  can  be  had  in  abundance  and  if  Nandica- 
varta  should  bear  blossoms,  cat^s-eye  (gem)  can  be  had  in 
abundance. 

9.  The  growth  of  the  Sindhuvara  indicates  that  pearls 
can  be  had  in  abundance  ; that  of  Kusumbha  (Safflower)  indi- 
cates that  Kumkuma  can  be  had  in  abundance,  that  of  the  red 
lotus  indicates  that  rulers  will  prosper  and  that  of  the  blue 
lotus  indicates  that  ministers  will  prosper. 

10.  If  Suvarnapushpa  (the  globe  amaranth)  should  blos- 
som, Merchants  will  prosper  ; if  the  lotus  should  blossom,  the 
Brahmins  will  prosper,  if  the  white  water-lily  should  blossom, 
priests  will  prosper  and  if  Sougandhika  (the  blue  lotus)  should 
blossom  the  Commanders  of  armies  will  prosper  and  if  the 
Arka  plant  should  blossom,  gold  will  become  cheap. 

11.  If  the  mango  should  thrive  well,  there  will  be  pros- 
perity in  the  land  ; if  Bhallata  (marking-nut  plant)  should 
thrive,  there  will  be  fear  in  the  land  ; if  the  Peelu  tree  should 
thrive  there  will  be  health  in  the  land  ; If  Khadira  and  Sami 
should  thrive,  there  will  be  famine  in  the  land  ; and  if  the 
Arjuna  tree  should  thrive  there  will  be  good  rain. 

12.  If  Pichumanda  (the  nirnb  tree)  and  Naga  should  bear 
blossoms,  there  will  be  prosperity  in  the  land  ; if  Kapittha 
should  bear  blossoms,  there  will  be  storm  ; if  Nichula  (Hijjal) 
should  bear  blossoms  there  will  be  drought  and  if  Kutaja 
should  bear  blossoms  there  will  be  disease  in  the  land. 

13.  If  Durva  (bent  grass)  or  the  Kusa  grass  should  blos- 
som, sugar-cane  will  thrive  ; if  Kovidara  should  blossom  there 
will  be  fear  from  destructive  fires  *,  and  if  Syamalata  should 
blossom,  pi’ostitutes  will  prosper. 

14.  There  will  be  good  rain  in  those  countries  where 
trees,  shrubs  and  creepers  grow  luxuriantly  with  glossy  leaves 
uninjured  by  worms,  but  if  the  leaves  should  be  otherwise 
there  will  be  little  rain. 


cu.  29.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


141 


GLOSSARY  OF  INDIAN  BOTANICAL  TERMS. 


ArjuEa,  The  tree  terminalia  Arjana,  LD(r^^LDirLh* 

Arka;  the  plant  Calotropis  Gigantea_, 

Asana,  Pterocarpus  Bilobus,  GwiaeoiE. 

Asoka,  Jonesia  Asoka.  It  is  tree  of  moderate  size  be- 
longing to  the  leguminous  class  with  magnificent  red  flowers, 

3^ !T S,  LDH LD* 

Aswakarna,  Vatic^  Robusta, 

Aswattha,  The  holy  fig  tree  ; ficus  religiosa, 

Atasi,  Common  flax,  a,iTa^rr. 

Atimuktaka,  Monntain  ebony,  006b65^^. 

Badari,  Jajube  tree, 

Bandhujeeva,  Pentapetes,  Phaenicea,  Qwuuit^  or 

Bhallata,  Marking-nut  plant,  Cashewnut  plant,  Q^iiiQ^fr 

Champaka,  Michelia  Champaka,  <3=Lhu€!Da,- 
Chiribilva,  A tree,  Dalbergia  Arborea,  q/aswsLDiTLO. 

Durva,  Bent  grass,  panic  grass,  Panicum  Dactylon, 

Hastikarna,  Castor  oil  tree,  or  QsrrLlGDi—, 

Inguda,  Name  of  a medicinal  tree — ^Terminalia  Catappa, 

eiirr^fr, 

Jambu,  The  rose  apple  tree,  Eugenia  Jambolana,  rsn-eubs). 

Kalama,  White  rice  growing  in  deep  waters  ; it  is  sown 
in  May  and  June  and  ripens  in  December  or  January,  Qeuendsfrj^ 
-sFUDurr* 

Kangu,  A kind  of  panic  seed  ; Panicum  Italicum. 
Kapittha,  Feronia  Elphantum,  eSefTfnnFih* 

Karpasa,  Cotton, 

Khadira,  the  tree  Acacia  Catechu,  having  hard  wood, 


142  BRIHAT  SAMHITA.  [CH.  29. 

Kodrava,  A species  of  grain  eaten  by  the  poor,  Paspalum 
Scrobiculatnm, 

Kovidara,  A tree  Baubinia  Veriegata  or  Q<srrEj(^ 

LDjrih, 

Ksheerika,  The  fig  tree, 

Kulutha,  A kind  of  pulse,  docichos  eniflorus, 

Kumkuma,  The  plant  and  the  pollen  of  the  flower-Cro- 
cus  Sativus,  (^la&LouL^. 

Kunda,  Cassia, 

Kuravaka,  Crimson  species  of  amaranth, 

Kusa,  Poa  Cynosuroides, 

Kusumbha,  Safflower,  Carthamus  Tinctorius,  ^rrujTiT<^Q<9=i^* 
Kutaja,  avariety  of  Jasmine,  c^(—LD6X)<sQioS)i£, 

Madhuka,  Bassia  Lattifolia,  ^^ues)u* 

Mudga,  A sort  of  kidney-bean  Phaceolna  Radiatus  or 
Phaceolus  Mungo,  ^£nuiu£jj» 

Naga,  The  small  tree  with  fragrant  blossom,  Mesua  Rox- 
burgh a,  LjQorSoar  or  ^^fErr<su&o» 

Nandikavarta,  A species  of  plant,  Nerium  coronarium, 

IBlhQuUfT6Ull-GS)L.* 

% 

Nichula,  The  tree  Barringtonia  Acutangula  commonly 
called  hijjal, 

Nyagrodha,  The  Indian  fig  tree,  ^gcldfud. 

Palasa,  Butea  Frondosa, 

Panduka,  A species  of  rice,  QeumdofrQ/seo* 

Parijata,  A shrub  Nictanthes  Tristis, 

Patala,  The  trumpet  flower  tree,  urr^ifl. 

Peelu,  A tree  ; Dillenia  Speciosa  ^snenasniu. 

Pichumanda,  The  nimb  tree,  Csvd)L/» 

Punnaga,  Rottleria  Tinctoria  from  the  blossoms  of  which 
a yellowish  dye  is  prepared. 

Sala,  The  Sal  tree  probably  the  Diospyros  Ebenaster  fur- 
nishing timber,  or  lojutuditi}}, 

Sami,  Acacia  Suma  possessing  a tough  hard  wood  sup- 
posed to  contain  fire,  ih. 


cii.  30.] 


BRIHAT  3AMHITA. 


143 


Sana^  hemp ; Cannabis  Sativa,  or  al-ldl/. 

Saptaparna,  The  tree  Alstonia  or  Echites  Scholaris, 

Ssouurr&^LDiTLh* 

Sarshapa^  Mustard  seed;  a©@. 

Shashtika;  A kind  of  rice  of  quick  growth  ripening  in 
about  60  days, 

Sindhuvara,  The  tree  Vitex  Negundo, 

Sireesha,  Acacia  Sirisa,  <su!tq^&» 

Sougandhika,  The  blue  lotus, 

Sukara,  A species^of  rice,  s£pjul^ 

Suvarnapushpa,  the  globe  amaranth  j miLD^es)^, 
Syamalata,  A medicinal  plant,  Periploca  Indica,  country 
Sarsaparilla,  iBecrf^^&QdjrL^* 

Tilaka,  A species  of  tree  with  beautiful  flowers,  LD<^3=rrL^ 

Lnjrih* 

Tinduka,  The  tree  Diospyros,  Embryopteres, 

LDinh  or  ^UDGDU, 

Vetasa,  The  Ratan;  calamus  Rotang, 

Yava,  Barley,  uj(ss)6v 


CHAPTER  XXX. 

On  Twilight  Hours. 

1.  That  period  which  precedes  the  moment  when  the 
Sun  has  just  half  risen  and  that  which  succeeds  the  moment 
when  the  Sun  has  just  half  set,  during  which  the  stars  are  in- 
visible is  known  as  Sandhyakala  or  twilight  period.  From  the 
peculiar  indications  of  this  period  effects  may  be  predicted  as 
follows. 

2.  These  indications  are  connected  with  animals,  birds, 
the  wind,  the  halo,  the  parhelion  or  mock-sun,  the  Parigha,* 
the  Abhravriksha,  f the  rainbow,  the  Gandharvanagara,  the 
Solar  rays,  the  Dunda  J and  dust  clouds,  their  gloss  and  color. 


* This  is  an  appearance  in  the  sky  of  the  shape  of  an  iron  bar. 
t An  appearance  resembling  a tree  in  shape  assumed  by  the  clouds, 
X An  appearance  in  the  sky  resembling  a club. 


144 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  30. 


3.  If  (luring  the  period  of  twilight  animals  should  conti- 
nue to  howl  fearfully,  the  village  will  perish ; if  these  animals 
remaining  to  the  South  of  an  army  should  so  howl  with  their 
faces  turned  to  the  Sun,  such  army  will  meet  with  ruin. 

4*  If  either  animals  should  remain  quiet  or  the  winds 
should  blow  gently  on  the  north  side  of  an  army  there  will  be 
wars  in  the  land  ; if  this  should  take  place  on  the  south  side  of 
an  army  such  army  will  be  reinforced  j if  it  should  take  place 
on  both  sides  there  will  be  rain. 

5.  If  at  day-break  birds  and  animals  should  howl  with 
their  faces  turned  to  the  Sun,  the  country  will  perish  ; if  they 
should  so  howl  on  the  south  side  of  a town  such  town  will  fall 
into  the  hands  of  enemies. 

6.  If  immediately  before  sun-rise  or  after  sun-set  violent 
winds  should  blow  breaking  the  tops  of  towers,  trees  and 
houses,  carrying  sand  and  pebbles  along  their  course,  howling 
fearfully  and  bringing  down  birds  in  flight  there  will  be 
misery  in  the  land* 

7.  If  during  the  twilight  hours  either  gentle  winds  or 
no  winds  should  blow,  or  if  birds  and  animals  should  either 
sound  gently  or  remain  quiet  there  will  be  prosperity  in  the 
land* 

8.  If  during  the  twilight  hours  such  appearance  as  the 
Danda,  lightning,  clouds  fish-like  in  shape,  parhelion,  halos,  the 
rainbow  and  the  appearance  known  as  Irawata  (an  imperfect 
rainbow)  and  solar  rays  should  appear  bright  and  glossy  there 
will  be  immediate  rain. 

9.  If  the  rays  of  the  rising  or  setting  Sun  should  be  bro- 
ken, of  unequal  lengths,  destroyed  partly,  altered  in  appear- 
ance, not  straight,  turning  to  the  left,  thin,  small,  short,  blunt 
or  ineffectual  and  dim  there  will  be  drought  and  wars  in  the 
land* 


Cii*  30.] 


BPJIIAT  SAME'ITA. 


145^ 


10.  when  the  sky  is  clear;,  the  rays  should  shoot  into 
the  sky  and  should  be  clear,  straight,  long  and  turning  to  the 
right,  there  will  be  happiness  in  the  land. 

11»  If  the  rays  of  the  rising,  setting  or  mid-day  Sun 
should  be  white,  glossy,  unbroken  and  straight,  the  rays  are 
known  as  Aniogha  (excellent)  rays. 

12.  If  the  color  of  the  rays  of  the  rising  or  setting  Sun 

should  be  a mixture  of  white,  black  and  yellow,  or  red-white 
or  black-white,  or  variegated  or  red  or  green,  or  of  the  color 
of  gold  and  if  the  rays  should  extend  throughout  the  sky,, 
there  will  be  rain  and  there  will  also  be  slight  fear  after  seven 
days.  ; 

13.  If  the  rays  of  the  rising  or  setting  Sun  should  be 
of  the  color  of  copper,  the  commander-in-chief  will  die;  if  they 
should  be  yellow  and  red,  he  will  suffer  miseries;  if  green, 
animals  and  crops  will  perish,  and  if  of  the  color  of  smoke  cows 
will  suffer. 

14«  If  red,  mankind  will  suffer  from  wars  and  destruc- 
tive fires  ; if  white-red,  there  will  be  rain  attended  with  winds 
if  of  the  color  of  ash,  there  will  be  no  rain ; if  the  rays  be 
variegated  in  color  or  if  the  color  should  be  a mixture  of  black 
and  other  colors,  there  will  be  slight  rain. 

15.  If  the  dust  raised  by  the  wind  at  sun-rise  or  sun-sefe 
should  be  very  red  or  very  black,  and  if  such  dust  should 
appear  to  move  in  the  direction  of  the  Sun,  mankind  will  suffer 
from  various  diseases  j if  the  dust  should  be  white,  there  will 
be  happiness  in  the  land-* 

16.  Dunda  is  an  appearance  in  the  sky  of  the  shape  of 
a rod  caused  by  the  wind  bringing  together  clouds  and  solar 
rays ; if  this  should  appear  in  the  south-east,  south-west,  north- 

* Parasara  says  that  if  the  rising  or  setting  sun  should  be  covered  by  dust 
resembling  the  white  powder  of  conch,  princes  will  triumph  in  war  and  mankind 
will  be  happy. 


19 


146 


BRIIIAT  SAMHITA. 


[cri.  30. 


west  or  north-east,  rulers  will  suflPer  miseries;  if  it  should 
appear  in  the  east,  south,  west  or  north,  the  Brahmins  will 
suffer. 

17.  If  it  should  appear  at  sun-rise  or  sun-set  or  mid-day 
(in  one  of  the  corners),  there  will  be  wars  in  the  land  ; if  it 
should  be  white,  red,  yellow,  or  black,  the  Brahmins,  the 
Kshatriyas,  the  Vysias  or  the  Sudras  will  suffer  respectively ; 
countries  to  which  the  Dun  da  points  will  also  suffer. 

18.  If  the  appearance  known  as  Abhrataru  (cloud- tree) 
should  be  seQu  with"  its  ends  of  the  color  of  coagulated  milk, 
the  body  being  black,  and  if  it  should  conceal  from  view  the 
midday-sun,  there  will  be  abundant  rain  ; also  if  the  clouds 
should  appear  of  beautiful  yellow  color  and  thick  at  the  bot- 
tom, the  rain-fall  will  be  abundant* 

19.  If  the  appearance  of  Abhravriksha  should  for  some 
time  move  regularly  and  then  disappear,  the  king  that  marches 
out  for  fight  will  perish  ; if  it  should  appear  like  a young  tree, 
princes  and  ministers  will  perish. 

20.  If  the  twilight  sky  should  be  of  the  color  of  the  blue 
lotus,  of  the  cat’s-eye  gem,  or  of  the  nut  of  the  lotus,  and  if 
the  sun  should  have  either  begun  to  rise  or  should  not  have 
set,  there  will  be  immediate  rain. 

21.  If  during  the  rainy  season  the  twilight  hours  should 
be  marked  by  the  appearance  of  clouds  shaped  raalefically,* 
if  the  clouds  should  assume  shapes  known  as  Gandharva- 
nagara  (Air-Castles),  and  if  the  sky  should  be  filled  with 
snow,  dust  and  smoke,  there  will  be  drought ; if  the  same 
things  should  occur  in  any  other  season,  there  will  be  wars 
in  the  land. 

22.  If  in  the  Sisira  (dewy)  and  other  seasons  of  the  year, 
the  twilight  sky  should  be  naturally  red,  yellow,  white  or 


* Like  a crow,  a vuliure,  an  ass,  and  the  like. 


cii.  30.] 


Bill  HAT  SAMHITA. 


147 


variegated  in  color,  or  of  the  color  of  Iotas  or  of  blood,  tliero 
will  be  prosperity  in  the  land  during  such  seasons;  but  if  the 
color  be  not  a natural  one,  that  is,  brought  on  by  dust-storms 
and  the  like,  mankind  will  suffer  miseries. 

23.  If  a cloud  shaped  like  a man  with  a weapon  in 
his  hand  should  appear  cut  and  in  this  state  move  in  the 
direction  of  the  sun,  there  will  be  fear  from  enemies ; if 
the  sun  should  appear  to  enter  clouds  of  the  shape  of  a 
white  town,  the  ruler  will  get  a new  town  and  add  it  to  his 
possessions. 

24*  If  white,  thick  clouds  should  come  forth  from  the 
south  and  conceal  the  spn,  there  will  be  rain  ; if  clouds  bush- 
like in  shape  and  rising  in  quarters  other  than  that  in  the 
direction  of  the  sun  and  conceal  the  sun,  there  will  also  bo 
rain. 


25.  If  at  sun-rise  the  appearance  known  as  Parigha  should 
appear  white,  the  reigning  prince  will  suffer;  if  of  blood  color, 
his  army  will  revolt;  and  if  of  the  color  of  gold,  the  army  will 
gain  in  strength. 

26.  If  the  appearance  known  as  Parhelion  (mock-sun) 
should  be  seen  on  both  sides  of  the  sun  and  be  large,  there  will 
be  much  rain  ; and  if  it  should  appear  all  round  the  sun,  not  a 
drop  of  rain  will  fall. 

27.  If  at  sun-rise  or  sun-set  the  clouds  should  appear  of 
the  shape  of  a flag  or  umbrella,  a mountain,  an  elephant  or  a 
horse,  the  chief  ruler  will  triumph  in  war;  if  they  should  bo 
of  blood  color,  there  will  be  wars  in  the  land* 

28.  If  at  sun-rise  or  sun-set  clouds  should  resemblo 
columns  of  smoke  of  burnt  straw  and  be  of  agreeable  appear- 
ance, the  array  will  gain  in  strength. 

29.  If  at  sun-rise  or  sun-set  clouds  should  appear  to  hang 
above  the  horizon  and  of  the  shape  of  trees  and  red  and  of  dis- 
agreeable appearance,  there  will  be  prosperity  in  the  land ; if 


148  BRIHAT  SAMHITA.  [CH.  31. 

the  clouds  should  assume  the  shape  of  towns,  mankind  will  be 
happy. 

30.  If  birds,  the  she-jackal  and  other  animals  should 
howl  turning  to  the  sun,  if  the  twilight  sky  should  be  marked 
by  dust  and  by  the  appearances,  Danda  and  Parigha,  and  the 
sun  should  appear  for  several  days  of  altered  appearance, 
the  chief  ruler  will  die  and  there  will  be  famine  in  the 
land. 

31.  Generally  effects  assigned  to  indications  connected 
with  the  morning  twilight  hours  will  come  to  pass  at  once, 
and  those  of  the  evening  twilight  hours,  either  in  the  night 
or  within  3 or  7 days  j but  effects  assigned  to  halos,  to  dust- 
storms  and  to  Parigha,  will  either  come  to  pass  at  once  or 
take  3 or  7 days ; those  assigned  to  the  solar  rays,  to  the 
rainbow,  lightning,  to  parhelion,  to  clouds  and  to  winds  will 
take  effect  that  same  day  ; those  assigned  to  birds  will  take 
8 days  ; and  those  assigned  to  animals,  7 days* 

32.  The  twilight  sky  is  visible  for  a Yojana  (5  miles)  ; 
lightning  for  6 Yojanas  ; the  roaring  of  the  clouds  will  be 
heard  at  a distance  of  5 Yojanas  ; and  there  is  no  limit  to  the 
extent  to  which  meteors  might  fall.* 


CHAPTER  XXXI. 

On  DlGDAHA.f 

1.  If  the  appearance  of  Digdaha  should  be  of  yellow 
color,  rulers  will  suffer  ; if  it  should  be  of  the  color  of  6re,  the 
country  will  suffer ; if  red  and  the  wind  should  blow  from 
right  to  left,  crops  will  suffer. 


^ Accordingly,  Devala  says  that  effects  assigned  to  meteoric  falls  are  not  con. 
fined  to  particular  localities,  but  are  felt  throughout  the  land. 

t Preternatural  redness  of  the  horizon  as  if  on  fire. 


cu.  32.] 


BlilHAT  SAMHITA. 


149 


2.  If  tlie  appearance  should  be  very  bi-iglit  and  cast; 
shadows^  the  rulers  will  suffer  ; if  it  bo  of  blood  color,  there 
will  bo  wars  in  the  land. 

3.  If  the  appearance  should  be  seen  about  the  eastern 
horizon,  rulers  and  Kshatriyas  will  suffer  ; if  it  should  be  seen 
about  the  south-eastern  horizon,  painters,  sculptors  and  childi’en 
will  suffer  ; if  in  the  south,  wicked  men,  the  Vysias,  and  mes- 
sengers will  suffer  ; if ‘in  the  south-west,  re-married  virgin 
widows  will  suffer* 

4*  If  the  appeara'nce  should  be  seen  about  the  western 
horizon,  Sudras  and  farmers  will  suffer;  if  in  the  north-western 
horizon,  thieves  and  horses  will  suffer  ; if  in  the  north,  the 
Brahmins  will  suffer  ; and  if  in  the  north-east,  heretics  and 
merchants  will  suffer* 

5*  If  when  the  sky  is  clear,  the  stars  bright,  and  the 
wind  blows  from  left  to  right,  the  appearance  of  Digdaha 
should  be  of  the  color  of  gold,  rulers  as  well  as  the  country 
will  prosper* 


CHAPTER  XXXII. 

On  Earthquakes* 

].  Some  say  that  earthquake  is  caused  by  huge  water 
monsters  and  some  that  it  is  caused  by  the  elephants  support- 
ing the  Earth,  resting  for  a time  from  their  labor. 

2*  According  to  some  earthquake  is  caused  by  the  vio- 
lent collision  of  winds  and  their  striking  the  Earth  in  conse- 
quence, and  according  to  others  the  cause  is  some  invisible 
and  unknown  agency. 

3*  Once  upon  a time,  in  the  days  gone  by,  the  Earth, 
being  shaken  by  the  rising  and  falling  of  winged  mountains, 
addressed  Brahma  (the  creator)  in  the  court  of  Indra,  as  fol- 
lows, and  with  feelings  of  shame. 


150 


BlilllAT  SAMIIITA. 


[CH.  32. 


4.  Lord,  I was  named  by  Thee  as  the  Un moving-  This 
character  lias  now  suffered,  and  I am  unable  to  bear  the 
troubles  caused  by  moving  mountains. 

5.  Brahma,  perceiving  her  broken  speech,  trembling 
lips,  bent  head  and  weeping  eyes,  spoke  as  follows  ; 

6.  0 Indra,  relieve  the  Earth  of  her  grief  ; throw  thy 
weapon  — the  Vajrayudha — to  destroy  the  wings  of  moun- 
tains.’^ Indra  saying,  It  is  done,”  told  the  Earth  not  to  fear 
and  spoke  to  her  as  follows  ; 

7.  Vayu  (the  wind),  Agni  (fire),  Indra  and  Varuna  (God 
of  rain),  will  however  henceforth  shake  thee  respectively  in 
the  first,  second,  third  and  fourth,  six  hours  of  day  and 
night,  to  indicate  the  future  good  or  bad  condition  of  the 
world. 

8.  The  asterisms  of  U-  Phalguni,  Hasta,  Chittra,  Svati, 
Punarvasu,  Mrigasira  and  Asvini  are  known  as  the  circle  or 
division  of  Vayu.  The  previous  symptoms  of  an  earthquake 
of  Vayu  occurring  when  the  Moon  is  in  any  of  these  seven 
asterisms,  will  last  for  seven  days. 

9.  These  symptoms  are  : the  sky  will  be  filled  with  dust 
and  smoke,  violent  winds  will  shake  the  trees,  and  the  rays  of 
the  sun  will  appear  dim. 

10.  In  a Vayavya  earthquake  the  crops  will  perish  ; 
the  Earth  will  become  dry  ; forests  will  suffer  ; medicinal 
plants  will  be  destroyed  ; and  tradesmen  will  be  afflicted 
with  dropsy,  asthma,  madness,  fever  and  phlegmatic  affec- 
tions. 

11.  Prostitutes  and  men  handling  weapons,  physicians, 
women,  poets,  musicians,  merchants,  painters  and  sculptors 
will  suffer  miseries,  as  well  as  the  people  of  Surat,  of  Ivuru,  of 
Magada,  of  Dasarna  and  of  Matsya. 

12-  The  asterisms  of  Pushya,  Krittika,  Visakha,  Bha- 
rani,  Magha,  P.  Bhudra  and  P.  Phalguni  are  known  as  the 


cir-  32.] 


BUUIAT  SAMIIITA. 


151 


ciiM'le  of  A^ni.  The  previous  symptoms  of  an  oartliqiiako 
of  Agni  occurring  when  the  Moon  is  in  any  of  these  seveji 
asterisms,  will  last  for  seven  days. 

13.  These  symptoms  are:  the  sky  will  be  filled  with 
the  li^ht  of  falling  meteors,  and  the  appearance  of  Digdaha 
will  be  seen  about  the  horizon,  and  fire  and  wind  will  rage 
over  the  laud. 

14.  In  an  Agneya  earthquake,  the  clouds  will  be 

destroyed;  tanks  and  lakes  will  become  dry;  rulers  will 
become  hostile  to  one  another,  and  mankind  vvill  suffer  from 
ring-worms,  cutaneous  eruptions,  fever,  spreading  itch  and 
jaundice.  ; 

15.  Also  men  of  bright  appearance,  cruel  men  and 
the  people  of  Asmaka,  Anga,  Balhika,  Tangana,  Kalinga, 
Bengal  and  of  Dravida,  and  numerous  hill-men  will  suffer 
miseries- 

16.  The  asterisms  of  Abhijit,  Sravana,  Dhanishta,  Bo- 
hini,  Jyeshta,  U.  Ashadha  and  Anuradha  are  known  as  the 
circle  of  Indra.  The  previous  symptoms  of  an  earthquake  of 
Indra  occurring  when  the  Moon  is  in  any  of  these  seven 
asterisms,  are  as  follows  : 

17-  Clouds  like  so  many  moving  mountains,  roaring 
aloud,  attended  by  lightning  and  black  as  the  horn  of  a 
buffalo,  as  the  bee  and  the  black  cobra,  will  yield  abundance 
of  rain. 

18.  In  an  Aindra  earthquake,  the  Vedas,  men  of  high 
caste  and  of  high  families,  rulers  and  commanders  of  armies, 
will  perish.  Dysentery,  inflammation  or  swelling  of  the  neck, 
diseases  of  the  face,  and  the  vomiting  diseases  will  aflBhcfc 
mankind. 

1 9.  Benares,  Yugandhara,  Kirata,  Keera,  Abhisara,  Hala, 
Madra,  Arbuda  and  Malawa  will  suffer,  and  there  will  be  rain 
to  suit  the  wants  of  the  people. 


152 


BRIIIAT  SAMHITA. 


[cH.  32* 


20.  1’he  astei’isms  of  Revati,  P.  Ashad’nn^  Ardra,  Aslesba_, 
Mula,  U*  Ashadha  and  Satabhishak  are  known  as  the  circle 
of  Varuna*  d'lie  previous  symptoms  of  an  earthquake  of 
Varuna  occurring  when  the  Moon  is  in  any  of  these  seven 
asterisms  are  as  follows  : 

21.  Clouds  of  the  color  of  the  blue  lotus,  of  the  bee 
and  of  colly rium,  sounding  agreeably,  in  masses  and  attended 
by  lightning,  will  yield  sharp  rain. 

22.  In  a Varuna  earthquake  persons  working  at  the  sea 
or  in  rivers  will  perish  ; there  will  be  excessive  rain  and  rulers 
will  cease  to  be  hostile.  The  people  of  Gonardha,  Chedi, 
Kukura,  Kirata  and  Videha  will  suffer  miseries. 

23.  The  effects  assigned  to  earthquakes  will  occur  within 
six  months  ; those  assigned  to  the  other  Utpatas  will  occur 
within  two  months  : these  occurrences  are  classified  by  some 
under  the  heads  of  the  four  circles  above  referred  to- 

24-  Meteoric  falls,*  cloud-castles,  dust-storms,  thunder- 
bolts, earthquakes,  fiery  appearances  about  the  horizon,  violent 
winds,  solar  and  lunar  eclipses,  changes  in  the  appearance  of 
stars  ; 

25.  Rain-fall  from  a cloudless  sky,  the  simultaneous 
occurrence  of  wind  and  rain,  the  appearance  of  smoke  and 
sparks  where  there  is  no  fire,  the  entry  of  wild  animals  into 
villages,  the  appearance  of  rainbow  in  the  sky  at  night ; 

26.  Any  unusual  appearance  of  the  sky  at  sun-rise  or 
sun-set,  broken  or  imperfect  halos,  rivers  running  in  opposite 
directions,  there  being  heard  the  music  of  the  drum  in  the 
sky,  and  the  like  unusual  occurrences  should  be  classified 
under  the  heads  of  the  four  circles  of  Vayu,  Agni,  Varuna  and 
Indra-t 


* Stanzas  24  to  26  are  taken  from  Varaha  Mihira’s  Samasa  Samkita. 

t Garga  says  ; pei’sons  in  whose  Nakshatras  earthquakes  and  the  like  Utpatas 
occur  will  suffer  miseries  ; they  shall  therefore  perfoi'm  expiatory  ceremonies 
in  honor  of  the  particular  Deva  under  whose  influence  the  occurrences  take 
place. 


CH.  32.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


153 


27.  As  regards  the  effects  of  earthquakes  classified  with 
respect  to  time  aud  Nakshatra^  whenever  there  is  an  inconsis- 
tency, the  Aindra  character  with  respect  to  time  will  take  pre- 
cedence over  the  Vayavya  character  with  respect  to  Nakshatra  j 
and  the  Vayavya  character  with  respect  to  time  over  the  Aindra 
character  with  respect  to  Nakshatra  •,  and  so  in  the  case  of  the 
Varuna  and  Agneya  character  of  each  earthquake,  division 
with  respect  to  time  takes  precedence  over  division  with  res- 
pect to  Nakshatra.f 

28.  If  an  earthquake  should  partake  of  the  character  of 
one  of  Agni  and  Vayu^  the  chief  ruler  will  perish,  and  mankind 
will  suffer  from  hunger,^  fear,  death  and  drought* * 

29.  If  an  earthquake  should  partake  of  the  character  of 
one  of  Varuna  and  of  Indra,  there  will  be  prosperity  in  the 
land,  good  rain  and  gladness  of  heart,  cows  will  yield  much 
milk,  and  rulers  will  cease  to  be  hostile* 

30.  If  an  earthquake  should  partake  of  the  character  of 
one  of  Vayu  and  Varuna,  the  people  of  Oojien,  of  Pulinda,  of 
Videha,  of  Cashmere,  of  Dravida,  of  Vasanta,  and  those  that 
live  on  the  banks  of  the  Sarayu,  will  suffer  miseries** 

31.  If  an  earthquake  should  partake  of  the  character  of 
one  of  Indra  and  of  Agni,  the  people  of  Ikshwaku,  Asmarathya, 
Pata,  Chara,  Abhira,  China  and  Marukaccha  and  prosperous 
rulers  will  suffer  miseries* 

32.  In  the  case  of  those  Utpatas  for  the  effects  of  which 
no  period  has  been  given,  the  rule  is  as  follows : if  the  occur- 
rences belong  to  the  circle  of  Vayu,  the  period  is  four  fort- 
nights ; if  to  the  circle  of  Agni,  three  fortnights ; if  of  Indra, 
seven  days;  and  if  of  Varuna,  the  effects  will  come  to  pass 
immediately* 


t Garga  says  that  if  an  earthquake  is  connected  with  two  Nakshatras,  division 
with  respect  to  time  of  day  takes  precedence. 

* Stanzas  30  and  31  are  taken  from  Parasara. 


20 


154 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  33. 


33.  In  an  earthquake  of  Vayu^  the  shock  will  be  felt  at 
a distance  of  two  hundred  Yojanas  (1,000  miles) ; in  one  of 
Agni,  110  Yojanas;  in  one  of  Yaruna,  180  Yojanas,  and  in 

one  of  Indra  160  Yojanas. 

34.  If  after  the  occurrence  of  an  earthquake  another 
should  occur  on  the  3rd,  4th,  7th,  15th,  30th  or  45th  day  the 
chief  ruler  will  perish. 


CHAPTER  XXXIIL 
On  Ulkas  or  Meteors.* 

1.  Meteors  are  appearances  of  those  who,  having  enjoyed 
in  the  higher  worlds  the  effects  of  their  Punnyakarma  (good 
deeds),  fall  down  to  the  Earth.  These  meteors  are  of  5 sorts 
known  technichally  as  !•  Dhishnya,  2.  Ulka,  3.  Asani  (thunder- 
bolt), 5»  Yidyut  (lightning),  and  5*  Tara»f 

2*  Dhishnya  produces  its  effects  within  a fortnight;  Ulka 
takes  also  the  same  period ; Asani  produces  its  effects  within  a 
month  and  a half;  Yidyut  within  6 days  and  Tara  takes  the 
same  period* 

3*  Tara  produces  only  a fourth  of  the  effects  assigned  to 
meteors  in  general.  Dhishnya  one-half,  and  Yidyut,  Ulka  and 
Asani  produce  their  full  effects. 

4.  Asani  is  a meteoric  substance,  circular  in  shape;  it 
strikes  with  a loud  report  men,  elephants,  horses,  deer,  rocks, 
houses,  trees  and  sheep  and  passes  into  the  Earth. 

5.  Yidyut  is  a large  bent  fiery  substance  and  strikes, 
with  a loud  and  fearful  sound,  living  creatures  and  collection 
of  wood* 


* This  term  has  been  made  to  include  a number  of  unusual  appearances— 
Vide  text. 

t Garga  says  that  weapons  that  have  slipped  from  the  hands  of  the  Devas 
are  known  as  Ulkas  (“meteors.”) 


CH.  33.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


155 


6*  Dhishnya  is  a blazing  fiery  meteoric  appearance,  thin 
and  with  a small  tail,  and  visible  beyond  a distance  of  40 
cubits.  Its  length  is  two  cubits* 

7.  Tara  is  a meteoric  substance,  a cubit  in  length,  and 
of  white  or  copper  color,  or  of  the  color  of  the  stem  of  the 
lotus ; it  will  appear  to  move  either  horizontally  or  vertically 
downwards  or  upwards  as  if  dragged  by  some  invisible  force. 

8.  Ulka  (meteor)  is  an  appearance  with  a large  head, 
a very  small  tail  and  ^of  the  length  of  a man’s  body  ; as  it 
falls  it  increases  in  length.  This  appearance  is  of  several 
kinds. 

¥ 

9.  It  assumes  the  shape  of  a dead  body,  a weapon,  an  ass, 
a camel,  a crocodile,  a monkey,  a tusked  animal,  a plough,  a 
deer,  a lizard,  a snake  or  smoke,  and  it  sometimes  appears 
double  headed*  It  causes  misery  in  the  land. 

10*  If  it  should  be  of  the  shape  of  a flagstaff,  of  fish,  an 
elephant,  a hill,  a lotus,  the  moon,  a horse,  melting  silver,  a 
swan,  the  Bilva  tree,  the  vajrayudha  (a  weapon),  or  conch  or  a 
triangle,  there  will  be  prosperity  in  the  land. 

11.  Numberless  meteors  fall  from  the  sky  ; these  im- 
port misery  to  the  reigning  sovereign.  Meteors  that  sim- 
ply whirl  round  and  round  import  misery  to  the  world  at 
large. 

12*  Those  meteors  which,  when  they  fall,  just  appear 
to  touch  the  solar  or  lunar  disc,  or  to  issue  from  it  and 
which  are  at  the  same  time  accompanied  by  earthquakes 
import  a foreign  rule,  famine,  drought  and  fears  of  various 
sorts. 

13.  If  the  meteors  should  appear  to  move  from  the  right 
to  the  left  of  the  sun  and  moon,  houseless  people  will  suffer 
miseries.  If  a meteor  which  appears  to  have  issued  from  the 
sun  should  fall  before  one  who  marches  out  for  fight,  it  imports 
good  luck. 


156 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  33* 


14.  If  the  meteors  should  be  white,  red,  yellow  or  black, 
the  Brahmins,  the  Kshatryas,  the  Vysias  and  the  Sudras  will 
respectively  suffer ; the  same  effects  will  occur  if  the  meteor 
falls  with  its  head,  breast,  side  or  tail  foremost. 

15*  If  the  meteor  should  be  of  fearful  appearance  and 
if  it  should  fall  in  the  north,  east,  south  or  west,  the  Brah- 
mins, the  Kshatriyas,  the  Vysias  and  the  Sudras  will  suffer 
respectively* 

If  the  meteor  should  appear  straight,  glossy  and  broken, 
and  if  in  its  fall  it  be  visible  to  within  a short  distance  from 
the  Earth,  the  Brahmins  and  the  others  will  prosper  (according 
as  the  direction  of  the  fall  of  the  meteor  is  the  north,  east, 
south  or  west). 

16.  If  the  color  of  the  meteor  should  be  white,  black,  red, 
blue,  of  blood  color,  of  the  color  of  fire,  or  black,  or  of  the 
color  of  ash,  and  if  its  appearance  should  be  fearful,  and  if  it 
should  appear  either  immediately  before  sun-rise  or  after  sun- 
set or  during  the  day,  or,  if  it  should  appear  crooked  or  cut 
into  halves,  there  will  be  fear  of  foreign  invasion. 

17.  If  the  meteor  should  be  seen  to  fall  crossing  the  discs 
of  stars  and  planets,  the  persons  and  objects  represented  by 
such  stars  and  planets  will  suffer.  If  it  should  be  seen  to  fall 
crossing  the  discs  of  the  sun  or  moon  at  rising  or  setting, 
houseless  people  will  suffer. 

18.  If  a meteor  should  be  seen  to  fall  crossing  the  discs 
of  P.  Phalguni,  Punarvasu,  Dhanishta  and  Mula,  young  women 
will  suffer.  If  it  should  be  seen  to  fall  crossing  the  discs  of 
Pushya,  Swati  and  Sravana,  the  Brahmins  and  the  Kshatriyas 
will  suffer. 

19.  If  it  should  be  seen  to  fall  crossing  the  discs  of  the 
pole-star  and  benefic  planets  and  stars,  the  chief  rulers  will 
suffer  ; if  crossing  the  discs  of  malefic  planets  and  stars, 
thieves  will  suffer,  and  if  crossing  the  discs  of  ordinary  stars, 
music  and  fine-arts  will  suffer. 


CH.  S3.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


157 


20.  If  the  meteor  should  be  seen  to  fall  on  the  images  of 
the  Devas  the  rulers  and  their  countries  will  suffer ; if  it  should 
fall  on  the  Sakra  tree  (Pentaptera  Arjuna)  kings  will  suffer, 
and  if  on  houses,  the  owners  thereof  will  suffer. 

21.  If  it  should  be  seen  to  fall  crossing  the  discs  of  the 
direction  planets*  the  countries  situated  in  the  respective 
directions  will  suffer ; if  on  threshing  floor,  farmers  will  suffer ; 
and  if  on  the  sacred  trees  planted  in  public  places  virtuous 
men  will  suffer. 

22.  If  it  should  fall  at  the  entrance  to  towns,  the  towns 
will  suffer ; if  on  ornamental  structures  over  buildings,  the 
people  will  suffer  ; if  in,  t^e  middle  of  Brahmin  habitations,  the 
Brahmins  will  suffer ; and  if  in  cattle-fold,  the  owner  of  the 
herd  will  suffer. 

23*  If,  while  it  falls,  its  noise  should  be  like  the  roar 
of  the  lion,  like  the  sound  caused  by  striking  against  one^s 
breast  or  like  a combination  of  vocal  and  instrumental  music 
the  rulers  with  their  countries  will  suffer. 

24.  If  the  meteoric  appearance  should  be  seen  to  hover 
in  the  sky  for  a long  time,  of  the  shape  of  a stick,  or  if  it 
should  be  seen  of  the  shape  of  Indra^s  banner  suspended  in  the 
sky  as  if  by  threads,  rulers  will  suffer. 

25.  If  while  it  fails  it  should  retrograde  in  its  motion, 
merchants  will  suffer ; if  it  should  move  horizontally,  queens 
will  suffer;  if  vertically  downwards,  rulers  will  suffer ; and  if 
vertically  upwards,  the  Brahmins  will  suffer. 

26.  If  the  meteor  should  be  of  the  color  and  shape  of  the 
peacock^s  train,  there  will  be  misery  in  the  land  ,*  if  it  should 
move  like  a serpent,  women  will  suffer* 

27.  If  it  should  appear  circular  in  shape,  towns  will 
suffer;  if  of  the  shape  of  an  umbrella,  priests  will  suffer;  and 


* These  are:  the  Sun — E. 5 Venus — S.  E.;  Mars — S. ; Eahu — S.  W.  ; Saturn — 
W. ; Moon— N.  W.  j Mercury — N. ; and  Jupiter — N.  E. 


BRIHA.T  SAMHITA. 


158 


[CH.  34. 


if  of  the  shape  of  a clump  of  bamboos,  the  kingdom  will  be 
imperilled. 


28*  If  it  should  be  of  the  shape  of  a snake  or  a pig,  or 
appear  as  if  covered  with  sparks  of  fire,  or  cut  or  fall  with 
noise,  there  will  be  misery  in  the  land. 

29.  If  it  should  appear  of  the  shape  of  the  rainbow,  the 
kingdom  will  suffer;  if  it  should  disappear  in  the  sky,  clouds 
will  be  destroyed;  if  it  should  move  against  the  course  of  the 
wind  or  obliquely  or  retrograde  in  its  motion,  there  will  be 
misery  in  the  land. 

30.  If  it  should  fall  on  a town  or  an  army,  the  ruler 
will  suffer  from  such  town  or  army;  if  it  should  appear  to 
come  blazing  from  a certain  quarter,  the  prince  that  marches 
for  fight  in  that  direction  will  succeed  in  battle. 


CHAPTER  XXXIV. 

On  Halos. 

1.  When  the  sky  is  filled  with  thin  light  clouds,  the 
solar  or  lunar  rays,  gathered  together  by  the  action  of  the 
wind,  and  made  into  circles  of  different  sizes  and  colors  form 
what  are  known  as  Halos. 

2.  If  the  color  of  these  halos  should  be  red,  their  lord  is 
is  Indra;  if  blue,  Yama;if  gray,  Varuna;  if  of  the  color  of 
the  dove,  Nirruti  (a  demon  presiding  over  the  S.  W.  point  of 
the  compass) ; if  of  the  color  of  the  clouds,  Vayu ; if  variegated 
in  color,  Eesanya  (a  deity  presiding  over  the  N.  E.  point  of 
the  compass);  if  green,  Kubera  (Cod  of  wealth) ; and  if  white, 
Agni. 

3.  Kubera  also  causes  the  halo  to  appear  black,  and  the 
other  gods  to  appear  with  the  color  belonging  to  each.  If  a 
halo  should  be  seen  to  appear  and  disappear  at  brief  intervals 
of  time,  it  is  caused  by  Vayu,  and  it  will  not  produce  effects  of 
a permanent  nature. 


CH.  34.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


159 


4.  If  the  halo  should  appear  of  the  color  of  a peacock  or 
fire  or  silver,  or  oil  or  milk,  or  water,  and  of  the  shape  of  a 
complete  circle  and  glossy,  there  will  be  happiness  in  the 
land. 

5.  If  the  solar  or  the  lunar  halos  should  continue  from 
the  rising  to  the  setting  of  the  luminaries,  frequently  changing 
in  color,  or  if  the  halos  should  appear  red  or  disagreeable  or 
imperfect  or  oblongular  or  triangular  in  shape,  or  of  the  shape 
of  a bow,  there  will  be  misery  in  the  land. 

6*  If  the  halo  should  appear  of  the  color  of  the  neck  of 
the  peacock,  there  will  be  rain ; if  it  should  appear  variegated 
in  color,  the  chief  ruler  .will  be  assassinated ; if  of  the  color  of 
smoke,  there  will  be  fear  in  the  land ; if  of  the  color  of  the 
rainbow  or  red  like  the  flower  of  the  Asoka,  there  will  be 
wars  in  the  land. 

7.  If  in  the  rainy  season,  the  solar  or  lunar  halo  should 
either  appear  of  a single  color,  or  glossy  if  of  different  colors, 
or  occupied  by  clouds  sword-like  in  shape,  or  if  the  sun,  while 
surrounded  by  a halo,  should  appear  very  bright  and  yellow, 
there  will  be  immediate  rain. 

8.  If  the  solar  or  lunar  halos  should  appear  big  at  the 
eastern  or  western  horizon  or  at  the  meridian,  and  if  birds  and 
animals  should  be  found  to  howl  with  their  faces  turned  to  the 
Sun  or  Moon,  and  if  the  color  of  the  halos  should  be  dim, 
mankind  will  be  tormented  with  various  fears.  If  the  halo 
should  be  crossed  by  meteors  or  lightning,  the  chief  ruler  will 
meet  his  death  by  a weapon. 

9.  If,  daily, ^ the  Sun  and  Moon  should  appear  red,  the 
chief  ruler  will  die;  if  halos  should  be  frequently  seen  round 
the  Sun  and  Moon  at  rising  or  setting,  or  in  the  meridian, 
rulers  will  be  killed. 


* According  to  Garga  if  the  appearance  should  last  for  a single  day,  the  chief 
ruler  will  die,  and  if  for  7 days,  the  country  will  perish. 


BEIHAT  SAMHITA. 


160 


[CH.  34. 


10.  If  the  halo  should  consist  of  two  concentric  circles, 
the  commander-in-chief  will  be  afflicted  with  fear,  and  there 
will  also  be  wars  but  not  of  a fearful  nature  ; if  the  halo  should 
consist  of  three  concentric  circles,  there  will  be  wars  ; if  of 
four  circles,  the  first  prince  will  suffer  miseries  j and  if  of  five 
circles,  the  capital  city  will  be  seized  by  the  enemy. 


11.  If  the  halo  should  include  within  it  a planet,  the 
Moon  and  Stars,  there  will  be  either  rain  within  three  days  or 
wars  within  a month.  According  to  some  that  prince  will 
suffer  miseries  the  lord  of  the  Lagna  (rising  sign)  of  whose 
nativity,  the  lord  of  the  sign  occupied  by  the  Moon,  and  whose 
star  should  happen  to  be  included  within  the  circle  of  a lunar 
or  solar  halo. 

12*  If  Saturn  should  be  included  within  the  circle  of  a 

lunar  or  solar  halo,  the  minor  crops  will  perish  ; there  will  be 
rain  attended  by  storms  and  deaths  among  settled  farmers. 

13.  If  Mars  should  be  so  included,  children  and  com- 
manders of  armies  will  suffer  and  there  will  be  fear  from  wars 
and  destructive  fires.  If  Jupiter  should  be  so  included,  priests, 
ministers  and  rulers  will  suffer. 


14.  If  Mercury  should  be  so  included,  ministers  and  per- 
manent writers  will  be  happy  and  there  will  be  good  rain.  If 
Venus  should  be  so  included,  princes  that  march  out  for  fight 
will  suffer  and  there  will  be  good  food  in  the  land. 

15.  If  Ketu  should  be  so  included,  mankind  will  suffer 
miseries  from  hunger,  fire,  death,  and  from  rulers.  If  Rahu 
should  be  so  included,  pregnancy  will  miscarry,  there  will  be 
disease  in  the  land,  and  rulers  will  suffer. 


CH.  34.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


161 


16-  If  two  planets  should  be  included  within  a solar  or 
lunar  halo,  there  will  be  wars  in  the  land  ; if  three  should  be 
so  included,  mankind  will  suffer  from  hunger  and  drought* 

17.  If  four  planets  should  be  included  within  a halo, 
rulers,  ministers  and  priests  will  suffer ; if  five  or  six  planets 
should  be  so  included,  the  world  will  come  to  an  end. 

18.  If  while  the.  comets  do  not  appear,  Mars  and  other 
planets  should  be  separately  eclipsed,  or  if  the  stars  should  be 
so  eclipsed,  rulers  will  perish.* 

19.  If  the  halo  should  appear  on  the  first  day  of  the  dark 
or  bright  half  of  a lunar  month,  there  will  be  deaths  among 
the  Brahmins;  if  oh-  the  second  day,  there  will  be  deaths 
among  the  Kshatriyas  •,  if  on  the  third  day,  there  will  be 
deaths  among  the  Vysiyas;  and  if  on  the  fourth  day,  there 
will  be  deaths  among  the  Sudras  ; if  the  halo  should  appear 
on  the  fifth  day,  villages  will  suffer;  if  on  the  sixth  day,  towns 
will  suffer;  and  if  on  the  seventh  day,  treasuries  and  store- 
houses will  suffer. 

20.  If  the  halo  should  appear  on  the  eighth  day  of  the 
dark  or  bright  half  of  a lunar  month,  the  first  prince  will 
suffer;  if  on  the  ninth,  tenth  or  eleventh  day,  the  king  will 
suffer;  if  on  the  twelfth  day,  the  chief  town  will  be  besieged 
by  the  enemy,  and  if  on  the  thirteenth  day,  there  will  be  con- 
fusion and  dismay  in  the  army. 

21*  If  the  halo  should  appear  on  the  fourteenth  day  of 
the  dark  or  bright  half  of  a lunar  month,  the  queen  will  suffer  ; 
and  if  on  the  fifteenth  (new  or  full  moon)  day,  rulers  will 
suffer. 

22.  The  inner  circle  of  the  halo  represents  citizens,  the 
outer  circle  represents  the  army  marching  out  for  fight,  and 
the  central  circle  represents  the  army  pursued  by  the  enemy. 


* If  comets  appear  at  the  time,  the  effects  assigned  to  them  will  alone  come 

♦ 

to  pass. 


21 


162 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH«  85* 


23.  If  any  of  these  circles  should  appear  of  blood-color 
or  black  or  of  fearful  appearance,  the  persons  it  represents 
will  suffer  defeat.  If  any  of  these  circles  should  appear  glossy, 
white  and  bright,  the  persons  it  represents  will  succeed  in 
battle* 


CHAPTER  XXXV. 

On  the  Rainbow. 

1.  The  many  colored  rays  of  the  Sun  falling  upon  the 
clouds  and  being  broken  by  the  winds  take  the  shape  of  the 
rainbow  in  the  sky. 

2*  In  the  opinion  of  certain  writers*  the  rainbow  is 
formed  of  the  expired  breath  of  certain  serpents  of  the  divine 
order;  princes  that  march  out  for  fight  in  the  direction  of  the 
rainbow  will  suffer  defeat. 

3.  If  two  rainbows,  similar  to  each  other  should  appear 
perfect,  unbroken,  bent  towards  the  Earth,  bright,  glossy, 
thick  and  variegated  in  color,  there  will  be  abundant  rain. 

4.  Rainbows  appearing  in  particular  quarters  of  the  sky 
will  cause  the  death  of  the  persons  represented  by  such  quar- 
ters,t  and  if  the  rainbow  should  be  seen  in  places  other  than 
the  sky,  there  will  be  deaths  in  the  land ; if  it  should  appear 
white-red,  mankind  will  suffer  from  weapons;  if  yellow,  from 
fire;  and  if  blue,  from  starvation. 

5.  If  the  rainbow  should  be  seen  in  the  middle  of  water, 
there  will  be  drought;  if  on  earth,  crops  will  be  injured;  if 
on  trees,  there  will  be  disease  in  the  land;  if  on  ant  hills,  there 
will  be  wars,  and  if  seen  at  night,  ministers  will  perish. 


* Kasyapa  and  men  of  his  school. 

t These  are  given  in  a subsequent  chapter , viz  : the  chapter  on  Sakuna.  They 
are:  King.— E.;  First  prince — S.  E. ; Commander-in-chief— S. ; Messengers— 
S.  W. ; Head-men — W. ; Spies — N.  W.;  Brahmins— N.;  the  principal  of  a sacri- 
ficial fire — N.  E, 


CH.  36.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA* 


163 


6.  If  the  rainbow  should  appear  when  there  is  no  rain^ 
there  will  be  rain,  and  if  while  it  rains,  the  rain  will  cease.  If 
it  should  appear  in  the  west,  there  will  also  be  rain. 

7.  If  at  ni^ht  the  rainbow  should  be  seen  in  the  east, 
kings  will  suffer  ; if  in  the  South,  the  commauder-in-chief  will 
die  ; if  in  the  West,  masters  will  suffer;  and  if  in  the  North, 
ministers  will  suffer. 

8.  If,  at  night,  the  rainbow  should  appear  white,  red, 
yellow  or  black,  the  Brahmins,  the  Kshatryas,  the  Vysiyas  and 
the  Sudras  will  suffer  respectively.  If  at  night  the  rainbow 
should  appear  in  particular  quarters  of  the  sky,  the  rulers  in 
those  quarters  of  the  Earth  will  perish. 

CHAPTER  XXXVI. 

On  Gandharvanagaras  or  Cloud  Castles. 

1.  If  the  appearance  of  Gandharvanagara  should  be  seen 
in  the  north,  priests  will  suffer  ; if  in  the  east,  rulers  will 
suffer  ; if  in  the  south,  commanders  of  armies  will  suffer,  and 
if  in  the  west,  the  first  prince  will  suffer.  If  the  appearance 
should  be  white,  the  Brahmins  will  suffer  j if  red,  the  Ksha- 
triyas  ; if  yellow,  the  Vysias  j and  if  black,  the  Sudras  will 
suffer. 

2.  If  the  appearance  should  be  seen  in  the  north  citizens 
and  rulers  will  suffer  ; if  seen  in  the  corners,  the  mixed  races 
will  suffer  ; and  if  seen  in  the  direction  opposite  to  the  sun, 
rulers  will  triumph  in  war. 

3.  If  the  appearance  should  be  seen  in  all  directions  and 
for  a long  time,  princes  and  countries  will  suffer  ; if  it  should 
be  of  the  color  of  smoke,  fire,  or  rainbow,  thieves  and  forest- 
men  will  suffer. 

If  the  appearance  should  be  seen  a little  white,  there  will 
be  suffering  from  thunderbolts  and  from  storms  ; if  in  the 


164 


BRIHAT  SAMHiTA. 


[CH.  38. 


direction  of  the  sun,  the  chief  ruler  will  perish  5 if  seen  on  the 
left  side,  there  will  be  fear  from  enemies,  and  if  on  the  right 
side  there  will  be  success  in  war. 

5.  If  it  should  appear  of  various  hues  and  shapes  or  of 
the  shape  of  a flag,  banner  or  archway,  such  bloody  wars  will 
rage  over  the  laud  that  the  Earth  will  drink  large  quantities 
of  the  blood  of  elephants,  men  and  horses. 


CHAPTER  XXXVIL 
On  Parhelion. 

If  the  appearance  of  Pratisurya  or  Parhelion,  should  be  of 
the  color  assigned  to  the  Sun  for  the  several  seasons  of  the 
year  and  at  the  same  time  glossy,  or  if  it  should  be  of  the  color 
of  the  cat^s-eye  (gem)  or  clear  and  white,'  there  will  be  pros- 
perity in  the  land. 

2.  If  the  appearance  should  be  yellow,  there  will  be 
diseases  in  the  land  j if  red,  resembling  the  color  of  the  Asoka 
flower,  there  will  be  wars.  If  these  appearances  should  together 
form  a figure  of  the  shape  of  a garland,  there  will  be  sufi’ering 
from  thieves  and  the  chief  ruler  will  perish. 

3.  If  the  appearance  should  be  seen  to  the  north  of  the 
Sun,  there  will  be  rain  ; if  to  the  south  of  the  sun,  there  will 
be  winds  5 if  on  both  sides  of  the  Sun  there  will  be  fear  from 
floods  ; if  seen  above  the  Sun  rulers  will  perish  ; and  if  below 
the  Sun,  there  will  be  deaths  in  the  land. 


CHAPTER  XXXVIII. 

On  Dust-Storms. 

1.  If  the  dust-storm  should  be  so  black  and  dense  as 
to  render  mountains,  towns  and  trees  undistinguishable,  the 
reigning  prince  will  die. 


CH.  39.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


165 


2*  If  the  dust-storm  should  be  of  the  color  of  smoke, 
there  will  be  suffering  in  the  countries  in  which  the  storm 
appears  for  the  first  time  or  disappears  finally,  within  seven 
days  from  the  occurrence  of  the  event* 

3*  If  the  dust-storm  should  resemble  white  clouds, 
ministers  and  people  at  large  will  suffer ; there  will  be  wars 
in  the  land  and  mankind  will  be  afflicted  with  innumerable 
miseries* 

4*  If  the  dust-storm  should  appear  to  hide  the  sky 
about  sun-rise  on  one 'or  two  consecutive  days,  mankind  will 
suffer  from  great  fears* 

5*  If  the  storm''^hould  continue  dense  for  a night  the 
chief  ruler  will  perish ; but  other  princes  will  prosper. 

6*  If  in  a particular  country  the  storm  should  be  found 
to  remain  for  two  days  together,  that  country  will  be  overrun 
by  the  army  of  the  enemy* 

7*  If  the  dust-storm  should  be  found  to  continue  for 
three  or  four  days,  there  will  be  scarcity  in  the  land,  and 
juice  will  be  injured ; if  it  should  continue  for  five  days,  con- 
tending armies  will  engage  in  fight* 

8*  If  a malefic  dust-storm  unaccompanied  by  the  appear- 
ance of  comets  and  the  like  abnormal  phenomena  should  be 
seen  in  any  Ritus  (season)  except  Sisira  (from  the  middle  of 
January  to  that  of  March),  it  will  produce  the  full  effects 
assigned  to  it. 

CHAPTER  XXXIX* 

On  Thunderbolts. 

1.  When  two  winds  come  in  collision,  that  which,  being 
struck,  falls  on  the  Earth  is  known  as  thunderbolt ; if  at  the 
time  birds  should  begin  to  sound  turning  to  the  Sun  there  will 
be  misery  on  Earth* 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


166 


[CH.  40. 


2.  If  there  should  occur  a fall  of  thunderblot  at  sunrise, 
ofl&cials,  kings,  rich  men^  soldiers,  women,  merchants  and  pros- 
titutes will  perish  ; if  the  fall  should  occur  within  three  hours 
after  sunrise,  sheep,  the  Sudras  and  citizens  will  suffer. 

3*  If  the  fall  should  occur  before  midday,  the  king’s 
servants  and  Brahmins  will  suffer  ; if  it  should  occur  within 
three  hours  after  midday,  the  Vysiyas  and  clouds  will  suffer, 
and  if  before  sunset  thieves  will  suffer. 


4.  If  the  fall  of  thunderblot  should  occur  at  sunset,  low- 
caste  men  will  suffer;' if  it  should  occur  in  the  first  three  hours 
after  sunset,  crops  will  suffer ; and  if  before  midnight,  ghosts 
will  suffer. 

5.  If  the  fall  of  the  thunderblot  should  occur  within  the 
three  hours  after  midnight,  horses  and  elephants  will  perish  ; 
and  if  before  sunrise,  travellers  will  suffer,  and  also  those 
countries  will  suffer  in  the  direction  of  which  the  roar  of  thun- 
der appears  to  move. 


CHAPTER  XL. 

On  Sasya  Jataka  or  Vegetable  Horoscopy. 

1.  We  shall  now  proceed  to  state  the  laws  or  yogas 
(positions  of  the  planets)  as  stated  by  Badarayana  (Vyasa) 
(from  which  to  determine  the  growth  of  the  greeshma  or  sarat 
crops)  when  the  Sun  just  enters  the  sign  of  Vrischika 
(Scorpio)  or  the  sign  Vrishabha  (Taurus). 

2.  If  at  the  time  when  the  Sun  enters  the  sign  Scorpio, 
benefic  planets  should  occupy  the  said  sign,  or  the  fourth, 
seventh  or  tenth  house  from  it,  or  if  these  four  houses  should 
be  within  sight  of  benefic  planets,  the  greeshma  or  summer 
crops  will  thrive. 


CH.  40.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHLTA. 


167 


3.  If,  when  the  Sun  is  in  Scorpio,  Jupiter  should  be  in 
Aquarius  and  the  Moon  in  Leo  or  vice  versaj  the  summer  crops 
will  thrive. 

4.  If,  when  the  Sun  is  in  Scorpio,  Venus  or  Mercury  or 

both  should  occupy  either  the  second  house  from  the  Sun,  viz., 
Sagittarius  or  the  twelfth  house  Libra,  summer  crops  will 
thrive.  If  at  the  same*  time  the  sign  of  Sagittarius  or  Libra 
should  be  within  sight  of  Jupiter,  such  crops  will  grow  in 
great  abundance.  i 

5.  If,  when  the  Sun  is  in  Scorpio,  and  between  benefic 
planets,  Jupiter  and  the^Moon  should  be  in  the  seventh  house, 
Taurus,  summer  crops  will  thrive  exceedingly  well  ; and  if^ 
when  he  has  just  entered  Scorpio,  Jupiter  should  be  in  the 
second  house,  Sagittarius,  the  extent  of  the  growth  of  such 
crops  will  be  one-half. 

6.  If,  when  the  Sun  is  in  Scorpio,  Venus,  the  Moon  and 
Mercury  should  respectively  occupy  the  eleventh,  fourth,  and 
second  houses  (from  Scorpio)  and  Jupiter  the  tenth  house, 
summer  crops  will  grow  in  abundance. 

7*  If,  when  the  Sun  has  just  entered  Scorpio,  Jupiter 
should  be  in  Aquarius,  the  Moon  in  ^laurus,  Mars  and  Sa- 
turn in  Capricornus,  the  summer  crops  will  thrive  well  and 
there  will  also  be  fear  of  foreign  invasion  and  diseases  in  the 
land. 

8*  If,  when  the  Sun  is  in  Scorpio,  there  should  be  male- 
fic planets  on  both  sides,  crops  will  be  injured  ; and  if  a male- 
fic planet  should  occupy  the  seventh  house,  Taurus,  crops  will 
suffer  blight. 

9.  If,  when  the  Sun  is  in  Scorpio,  malefic  planets  should 
occupy  the  second  house  Sagittarius  and  if  they  are  not  within 
sight  of  benefic  planets  the  first  crops  will  suffer  and  the  sub- 
sequent crops  will  thrive* 


168 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  41* 


10.  If,  when  the  Sun  is  in  Scorpio,  two  malefic  planets 
should  occupy  the  seventh  house,  Taurus,  crops  will  be  in- 
jured ; but  if  such  seventh  house  should  be  within  sight  of 
benefic  planets  at  the  same  time,  crops  will  grow  here  and 
there. 

11.  If,  when  the  Sun  is  in  Scorpio,  two  malefic  planets 
should  occupy  the  seventh  and  sixth  houses,  crops  will  thrive 
and  the  price  of  commodities  will  fall. 

12.  The  growth  of  the  autumnal  crops  should  be  deter- 
mined from  the  position  of  the  planets  with  reference  to  sign 
Taurus  at  the  time  when  the  sun  enters  it  just  in  the  same 
way  as  the  summer  crops  as  stated  above. 

13.  If  while  the  Sun  passes  through  the  signs  of  Aries, 
Taurus  and  Geminii,  he  should  be  accompanied  by  or  within 
sight  of  benefic  planets,  the  summer  crops  will  flourish 
and  the  price  of  such  produce  will  either  be  moderate  or  will 
rise. 

14.  If  while  the  Sun  passes  through  the  signs  of  Sagit- 
tarius, Capricornus  and  Aquarius,  he  should  either  be  accom- 
panied by  or  within  sight  of  benefic  planets  the  autumnal 
crops  will  flourish  and  the  price  of  such  produce  will  either  be 
moderate  or  will  rise  ; if  at  the  time  of  harvest  the  sun  should 
be  either  accompanied  by  or  within  sight  of  malefic  planets, 
prices  will  either  fluctuate  or  fall. 


CHAPTER  XLI. 

On  Commodities. 

1.  I shall  now  proceed  to  state  the  Zodiacal  division  of 
commodities  adopting  the  views  of  the  sages  of  the  past  with 
a view  to  enable  men  to  know  before-hand  what  articles  can  be 
had  in  abundance  and  what  will  become  rare. 


CH.  41.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


169 


2.  Sign  Mesha  (Aries)  represents  cotton  and  woollen 
fabric,  leathern  oil  jars,  beans,  wheat,  raggy,  barley,  dry  crops 
in  general  and  gold. 

3.  Sign  Vrishabha  (Taurus)  represents  cloths  in  general, 
flowers,  wheat,  rice,  barley,  bufialo  and  cows  ; and  sign  Mi- 
thuna  (Gemiuiij  represents  the  autumnal  crops,  creepers,  the 
root  of  the  lily  and  cotton. 

4 

4.  Sign  Karkataka  (Cancer)  represents  Kodrava,  plan- 
tains, bent  grass,  fruits,  roots,  leaves  and  bark ; and  sign 
Simha  (Leo)  represents  food  grains,  juice,  the  skin  of  the  lion 
and  the  like  animals  and  jaggery. 

5.  Sign  Kanya  (^irgo)  represents  common  flax,  barley, 
horse  gram,  wheat,  kidney-beans  and  Nishpava  (a  kind  of  legu- 
minous plant — Dolichos  tetraspermus)  ; and  sign  Tula  (Libra) 
represents  black  gram,  wheat  and  mustard  seed. 

6»  Sign  Vrischika  (Scorpio)  represents  sugar-canes,  wet 
grains,  metals,  and  woollen  fabric ; and  sign  Dhanus  (Sagit- 
tarius) represents  horses,  salt,  cloth,  weapons,  gingelly  seeds 
and  roots. 

7*  Sign  Makara  (Capricornus)  represents  trees,  bushes, 
wet  grains,  sugar-canes,  goldand  black-lead  j and  sign  Kum- 
bha (Aquarius)  represents  water-fruits  and  flowers,  gems  and 
articles  of  various  shapes. 

8.  Sign  Meena  (Pisces)  represents  pearls  and  other  shell- 
gems,  diamonds,  various  oils  and  fishes. 

9.  If  Jupiter  should  occupy  the  4th,  10th,  2nd,  11th, 
7th,  9th,  or  5th  house  from  any  particular  sign  of  the  Zodiac 
or  if  Mercury  should  occupy  the  2nd,  11th,  10th,  5th,  or  8th 
house  from  any  particular  sign  ; 

10.  Or  if  Venus  should  occupy  the  6th  or  7th  house  from 
a particular  sign,  the  articles  represented  by  that  sign  will 

perish  ; and  if  he  occupies  any  of  the  other  houses,  the  articles 

, 22 


170 


BKIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  42. 


will  flourish ; if  malefic  planets  should  occupy  the  3rd,  6th, 
10th,  or  11th  house  from  a particular  sign,  the  articles  repre- 
sented by  that  sign  will  flourish  and  the  reverse  will  be  the 
case  if  the  planets  occupy  any  of  the  other  houses* 

11.  If  powerful  malefic  planets  should  occupy  any  of  the 
houses  other  than  the  3rd,  6th,  10th,  and  11th  houses  from  a 
particular  sign,  the  articles  assigned  for  that  sign  will  sell  dear 
and  become  scarce. 

12.  Generally  if  benefic  planets  should  be  powerful  in 
their  several  signs  as  stated  above,  articles  will  flourish  and 
the  prices  will  be  moderate  and  the  articles  themselves  can  be 
had  easily. 

13*  If  at  any  time  a particular  sign  should  be  within 
sight  of  benefic  planets  occupying  malefic  houses,  the  articles 
assigned  for  that  sign  will  not  be  much  injured,  but  if  the 
planets  should  be  powerful  malefic  planets  the  articles  will 
perish. 


CHAPTER  XLII. 

On  the  Price  op  Commodities. 

1.  Judging  from  the  phenomena  of  excessive  rain,  of 
tneteoric  falls,  of  the  appearance  of  the  Danda,  of  Halos,  of 
eclipse  and  parhelion  occurring  on  the  new  or  Full  Moon  day 
of  a particular  month  ; 

2.  The  astronomer  shall  determine  that  the  price  of  com- 
modities will  rise  ; but  if  the  phenomena  should  occur  on  any 
other  days  of  the  month,  rulers  will  be  at  war. 

3.  If  the  phenomena  referred  to  above  should  occur 
when  the  Sun  is  in  the  sign  Mesha  (Aries),  April — May,  a tra- 
desman shall  purchase  the  produce  of  Sarat ; and  if  the  pheno- 
mena should  occur  when  the  Sun  is  in  Vrishabha  (Taurus),  he 
shall  store  up  wild  roots  and  fruits  ; and  if  he  should  dispose 


CH.  42.]  BRIHAT  SAMHITA.  171 

of  these  articles  in  the  fourth  month  after  purchase,  he  will 
make  much  profit* 

4*  If  the  phenomena  should  occur  when  the  Sun  is  in 
the  sign  Mithuna  (Geminii),  the  tradesman  shall  store  up  juicy 
articles  and  grains,  and  if  he  should  sell  them  in  the  sixth 
month  he  would  make  much  profit. 

5*  If  the  phenomena  should  occur  when  the  Sun  is  in 
the  sign  Karkataka,  he  shall  store  up  honey,  perfumes,  oil, 
ghee  and  sugar,  and  if^he  should  dispose  of  them  in  the  second 
month,  they  would  fetch  double  their  value;  but  if  he  should 
dispose  of  them  before  or  after  the  second  month,  he  would 
sustain  loss.  ’• 

6.  If  the  phenomena  should  occur  when  the  Sun  is  in 
the  sign  Simha  (Leo)  the  tradesman  shall  store  up  gold,  gems, 
leather,  armours,  weapons,  pearls  and  silver,  and  if  he  should 
dispose  of  these  in  the  fifth  month,  there  would  be  much  pro- 
fit; but  if  he  should  do  so  either  before  or  after  the  fifth 
month,  he  would  sustain  loss. 

7*  If  the  phenomena  should  occur  when  the  Sun  is  in 
the  sign  Kanya  (Virgo)  the  tradesman  shall  purchase  Chamara 
(fan),  asses,  camels  and  horses  ; if  he  should  dispose  of  them 
in  the  sixth  month,  he  would  get  double  their  value* 

8.  If  the  phenomena  should  occur  when  the  Sun  is  in 
the  sign  Tula  (Libra)  the  tradesman  shall  store  up  yarn  goods, 
crystal  wares,  flowers  of  gold  color  and  grains ; if  he  should 
dispose  of  them  in  the  sixth  month,  he  would  get  double  their 
price* 

9.  If  the  phenomena  should  occur  when  the  Sun  is  in 
the  sign  Vrischika  (Scorpio)  the  tradesman  shall  store  up 
fruits  and  roots  of  a lasting  nature  and  various  precious  stones, 
and  if  he  should  dispose  of  them  at  the  end  of  two  years,  they 
would  fetch  double  their  price. 


172 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  43. 


10.  If  the  phenomena  should  occur  when  the  Sun  is  in 
Dhanus  (Sagittarius)  the  tradesman  shall  store  up  conch  shells, 
corals,  articles  of  crystal  and  pearls ; if  he  should  dispose  of 
them  in  the  sixth  month,  they  would  fetch  double  their  price* 

11.  If  the  phenomena  should  occur  when  the  Sun  is  in 
the  signs  of  Makara  (Capricornus)  and  Kumbha  (Aquarius)  the 
tradesman  shall  store  up  iron  and  other  metals,  vessels  and 
grains;  if  he  should  dispose  of  them  at  the  end  of  a month 
they  would  fetch  double  their  price* 

12.  If  the  phenomena  should  occur  when  the  Sun  is  in 
Meena  (Pisces)  the  tradesman  shall  store  up  roots,  fruits,  ves- 
sels and  precious  stones ; if  he  should  dispose  of  them  in  the 
sixth  month,  they  would  fetch  double  their  price* 

13.  If  the  Sun  or  Moon  should  happen  to  be  in  a single 
sign  accompanied  by  an  Atimitra  (very  friendly)  planet,  the 
tradesman  may  deal  profitably  in  the  articles  assigned  for  that 
sign. 

14.  If  the  New  or  Full  Moon  should  either  be  accompa- 
nied by  or  within  view  of  benefic  planets  the  price  of  commo- 
dities will  rise.  If  the  Sun  should  be  either  accommpanied  by 
or  within  view  of  malefic  planets,  the  price  will  fall.  Generally 
predictions  are  to  be  made  on  a full  consideration  of  the 
strength  or  weakness  of  the  Zodiacal  signs. 


CHAPTER  XLIII. 

On  Indra  Dhwaja  or  Indra^s  Banner. 

1.  The  Devas  addressed  Brahma  as  follows  : — Lord, 
we  are  unable  to  defeat  the  Asuras  in  fight  and  we  have  there- 
fore come  to  thee  for  help.’^  Brahma  spoke  to  the  Devas  as 
follows  : — ' 


CH.  43.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


]73 


2.  ^^The  Supreme  Vishnu  of  the  sea  of  milk  will  g’ive 
you  a banner  at  the  sight  of  which  the  Asuras  your  enemies^ 
will  cease  to  oppose  you  in  battle. 

3.  The  Devas^  including  the  great  Indra^  took  leave  of 
Brahma  and,  proceeding  to  the  sea  of  milk,  began  to  sing  as 
follows  the  praises  of  Vishnu  on  whose  breast  shone  brilliantly 
the  Koustubha  gem  : — . 

4.  Lord  of  Lakshumi,  the  unthinkable,  thou  hast  no 
equal ; thou  art  omnipresent  and  thou  existest  invisibly  diffused 
through  the  bodies  of  all  corporeal  creatures  ; thou  art  the  Su- 
preme Soul  and  thou  h^st  neither  beginning  nor  end.^^ 

5.  God  Narayana,  pleased  with  the  praise  of  the  Devas, 
gave  them  a Dhwaja  (flag-staff)  which  at  the  same  time  served 
both  as  the  Sun  and  the  Moon  respectively  to  the  lotus-like 
face  of  the  Deva  and  Asura  females. 

6*  Tndra  was  mightily  pleased  to  accept  the  gift  of  the 
Dhwaja  which  had  its  origin  in  the  Tejas  (light)  of  Vishnu  and 
which  was  set  with  precious  stones  and  mounted  on  an  eight- 
wheeled car  shining  brilliantly  as  the  Summer  Sun. 

7.  Planting  erect  the  Dhwaja,  which  was  adorned  with  a 
girdle  of  small  bells,  with  garlands,  with  umbrellas  and  with 
a huge  bell,  Indra  defeated  his  enemies  in  the  field  of  battle. 

8.  Indra  gave  the  Dhwaja,  which  was  of  bamboo  wood, 
to  Vasu,  the  ruler  of  the  province  of  Chedi,  who  was  gifted 
with  the  power  of  flight  into  celestial  regions,  and  Vasu  then 
performed  pooja  to  the  Dhwaja. 

9.  Indra,  pleased  with  Vasu^s  pooja  spoke  as  follows  : — 
those  princes  who  might  go  through  a similar  ceremonial  wor- 
ship shall  become  as  prosperous  and  successful  rulers  as  Vasu, 
the  ruler  of  Chedi. 


174  BEIHAT  SAMHITA.  [CH.  43* * * § 

10.  The  subjects  of  these  rulers  will  also  become  happy 
and  prosperous  and  be  freed  from  fear  and  disease. 

The  Dhwaja  itself  shall  indicate  the  course  and  nature  of 
future  events. 

!!•  By  command  of  Indra  the  ceremonial  worship  of  the 
Dhwaja  has  been  gone  through  by  princes  desirous  of  strength 
and  victory.  I shall  now  proceed  to  give  a brief  description  of 
the  same  according  to  the  Shastras* 

12.  On  an  auspicious  day  and  in  an  auspicious  hour  and 
Nakshatra^  the  astronomer  shall  leave  for  the  forest  accom- 
pained  by  the  carpenter* 

13.  He  shall  not  cut  any  tree  growing  in  flower  gardens, 
in  temples,  on  cremation  grounds,  on  public  roads,  on  sacrifi- 
cial fire-sites  or  trees  of  short  growth,  or  dried  trees  or  trees 
of  stinted  growth  at  the  top,  thorny  trees  or  trees  surrounded 
by  creepers  and  over-grown  with  mistletoes. 

14.  He  shall  also  reject  trees  with  holes  in  which  dwell 
numerous  birds  and  trees  injured  by  the  wind  or  fire  and  he 
shall  reject  trees  of  feminine  denomination,  for  all  those  trees 
are  not  fit  for  the  staff  of  Indra’s  banner. 

15.  The  five  trees  Arjuna*,  Asvakarna*,  Priyakaf 
DhavaJ,  Udumbara,§,  are  suited  for  the  purpose.  Either  one 
of  these  or  some  other  well  known  tree  : 

16.  Or,  some  tree  growing  on  yellow  or  black  soil  shall  be 
selected  by  the  astronomer  who,  alone  and  at  night,  approach- 
ing the  same,  shall  touch  it  and  address  it  as  follows  : — 


* & * already  explained, 

t Priyaka,  known  in  Tamil  slssl—  iIulditiIs 

J Dhava — Acacia  Leucophloca,  known  in  Tamil  as  Q6U^(?Qi€i)LDirt2). 

§ Udnmbara — The  tree  Ficus  Glomerata. 


CH.  43.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


175 


17.  May  ifc  be  well  with  the  demons  that  dwell  in  this 
tree,  salntation  to  yon  alb  accept  these  presents  and  be  pleas- 
ed to  dwell  in  some  other  place.^’ 

18.  ^^0  excellent  tree;  the  king  wants  thee  for  the  con- 
strnction  of  his  Indra-Dhwaja.  May  it  be  well  with  thee.  I 
entreat  thee  to  accept  of  this  honor.^^ 

♦ 

19.  The  astronomer  shall;  facing  either  the  East  or  North; 
cat  the  tree  before  sunrise  ; if;  while  cutting;  the  axe  should 
produce  a rustling  souTid;  it  indicates  evil.  If  the  sound 
should  be  agreeable  or  Ibud;  it  indicates  good. 

• r 

20*  If  the  tree  should  fall  on  the  East  or  North  side 
without  breaking  or  bending  or  being  caught  by  a neighbour- 
ing tree;  the  ruler  will  become  triumphant  in  war.  If  it 
should  fall  otherwise,  the  tree  shall  be  rejected. 

21.  He  shall  cut  off  four  inches  at  the  top  and  eight 
inches  at  the  bottom,  and  shall  then  put  the  wood  in  water. 
He  shall  then  remove  it  to  the  town  gate  either  in  a cart  or 
on  the  shoulders  of  men. 

22»  If;  while  it  is  being  carried  in  a cart,  any  of  the 
spokes  of  the  wheels  should  break,  the  king’s  army  will 
revolt ; if  the  felly  of  the  wheel  should  break,  the  army  will 
suffer  destruction.  If  the  axle  should  break,  the  king’s  wealth 
will  suffer ; if  the  pin  or  bolt  (at  the  end  of  the  pole)  should 
break,  the  carpenter  will  die. 

23.  On  the  Ashtamy  (8th  lunar)  day  of  the  light  half  of 
Bhadrapada,  the  king,  accompanied  by  the  citizens,  astrono- 
mers, astrologers,  ministers  and  priests  in  their  robes, 

24.  Shall  cause  the  beam  to  be  carried  in  procession 
round  the  town  after  covering  it  with  a new  cloth,  and  adorn- 
ing it  with  flowers  and  perfumes,  sweet  music  playing  all  the 
while* 


176 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  43« 


25.  The  town  shall  be  adorned  with  flags^  festoons  and 
garlands  ; the  citizens  shall  all  be  merry,  the  street  shall  be 
kept  neat  and  clean  and  the  party  shall  be  accompanied  by 
dancing  women  in  their  best  attire* 

26.  The  houses  and  shops  shall  be  decorated  ; Vedic 
hymns  shall  be  chanted  aloud ; dancers  and  dancing  masters 
and  singers  shall  dance  and  sing  at  every  corner  and  at  the 
junction  of  roads* 

27*  If  the  flags  with  which  the  town  is  adorned  should 
happen  to  be  white,  there  will  be  success  in  war ; if  yellow, 
there  will  be  disease  ; if  of  mixed  color,  there  will  also  be  suc- 
cess in  battle,  and  if  red,  there  will  be  wars  in  the  land* 

28*  If  while  the  beam  is  carried,  it  should  be  struck 
down  from  its  place  by  a frightened  elephant  or  other  animals 
the  king  will  be  afflicted  with  various  fears  ; or  if  children 
should  clap  their  hands  or  animals  engage  in  fight  there  will 
be  wars* 

29.  The  carpenter  shall  again  work  the  beam  into  a 
proper  shape  and  plant  it  over  the  place  prepared  for  the  pur- 
pose* The  King  shall  spend  the  Yekadasi  (11th  lunar)  day 
by  the  side  of  the  beam  without  sleep. 

30.  The  priests,  dressed  in  white  robes  and  turbans  shall 
perform  homa  (fire  ceremony),  chanting  hymns  in  honor  of 
Indra  and  Vishnu  and  the  astrologer  shall  note  the  indications 
around  and  build  his  predictions  theron* 

31*  If  the  flame  of  the  homa  fire  should  assume  the  ap- 
pearance of  benefic  objects,  if  it  should  emit  good  odour  or  ap- 
pear bright  and  large,  it  indicates  prosperity  to  the  King  and 
not  otherwise.  I have  treated  of  this  subject  in  my  work  en- 
titled the  Yoga  Yatra.* 

* A manuscript  copy  o£  this  work  is  with  Dr.  Kerue  now  in  Leydouj 
Holland. 


CH.  43.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


177 


32»  If  at  the  moment  of  the  final  ahuti  (pouring  of  ghee 
into  the  hre)  the  flame  should  appear  bright  and  fine  and 
whirl  to  the  rights  the  King  will  become  the  sole  ruler  of  the 
entire  tract  of  land  watered  by  the  Ganges  and  the  Jumna  and 
surrounded  by  seas  on  both  sides. 

33.  If  the  flame  should  be  of  the  color  of  gold;  of  the  flower 
of  Asoka;  of  Kurandaka  or  lotus  or  of  the  color  of  Vyduriya 
or  the  blue  lotus,  the  King  will  become  so  prosperous  and 
wealthy  that  the  dark  r^)oms  of  his  palace  will  be  illumined  by 
the  rays  of  light  proceeding  from  abundance  of  spelndid  gems. 

¥ 

34.  If  the  sound' of  the  flame  should  resemble  that  of 
rolling  chariots,  the  sea,  the  clouds  and  elephants  or  the  sound 
of  drum,  the  king  will  become  so  prosperous  that  numberless 
rutting  elephants  will  be  seen  rubbing  aganist  one  another  in 
the  direction  of  his  march  and  forming  one  dark  scene  as  far  as 
the  eye  can  reach. 

35.  If  the  flame  should  present  the  shape  of  a pot,  a horse, 
an  elephant,  a banner,  or  a mountain,  the  King  will  become  the 
sole  ruler  of  the  country  to  which  the  Eastern  and  Western 
Ghauts  form  as  lips  and  the  Himalaya  and  Vindhaya  mountains 
form  as  breasts. 

36*  If  the  fire  should  smell  like  the  juice  of  elephants  in 
rut,  like  the  earth,  the  lotus,  parched  grain  or  honey,  the  king 
will  become  so  prosperous  and  powerful  that  the  ground  before 
his  seat  will  be  lit  with  the  rays  of  the  gems  in  the  crowns  of 
rulers  bending  in  submission  before  him. 

37.  What  has  been  said  with  respect  to  the  homa  fire  on 
the  occasion  of  the  ceremony  in  connection  with  Indra  Dhwaja 
applies  as  well  to  homa  fires  on  occasions  of  nativity,  sacrificial 
fire  ceremonies,  Graha  Santy  (purification  of  houses),  royal 
marches  and  of  marriages. 


23 


178 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  43. 


38.  After  feeding  the  Brahmins  with  rich  and  sumptuous 
meals  and  presenting  them  with  money,  the  prince  either  on 
the  12th  lunar  day,  when  the  Moon  is  in  the  asterism  of 
Sravana  or  other  stars,  shall  have  Indra^s  banner  duly  planted 
in  its  place. 

39.  According  to  Manu,  images  known  as  Indra’s  daugh- 
ters, and  seven  or  five  in  number,  shall  be  made  under  the 
direction  of  men  learned  in  the  Shastras : of  these  a figure 
known  as  Nunda  shall  be  attached  to  the  beam  at  a point 
which  is  a quarter  of  its  height  from  the  ground ; another 
figure  known  as  Upananda  shall  be  fixed  at  the  middle  point 
of  the  beam. 

40.  A third  figure  known  as  Jaya  shall  be  placed  at  a 
point  above  Nunda  whose  distance  is  one-sixteenth  of  the  height 
of  the  beam  ; a fourth  figure  known  as  Vijaya  shall  be  fixed  at 
a similar  height  above  Upananda.  Two  more  figures,  each 
known  as  Vasundhara,  shall  be  fixed  at  the  same  height,  the 
one  above  Jaya  and  the  other  above  Vijaya.  A seventh  figure 
known  as  Sakragenitri  (Indra^s  mother)  shall  be  fixed  in  the 
intervening  space,  one-eighth  of  the  banner  in  height,  lying 
below  the  central  point. 

41.  The  king  shall  further  cause  to  be  made  the  several 
ornaments  of  various  shapes  which  the  Devas  were  pleased  to 
present  to  Indra^s  banner. 

42.  The  first  ornament  was  presented  by  Visvakarma. 
It  was  oblongular  in  shape  and  of  the  color  of  red  Asoka  flower; 
the  second  was  presented  by  both  Brahma  and  Siva.  It  was 
a girdle  of  various  hues. 

4.3.  The  third  was  presented  by  Indra.  It  was  octagonal 
in  shape  and  black-red  in  color.  The  fourth  ornament,  known 

as  Masookara,  was  presented  by  Yama ; it  was  black  and 
glossy. 


CH.  43.] 


BEIHAT  SAMHITA. 


179 


44.  The  fifth  ornament  was  presented  by  Varuna;  it 
was  hexagonal  in  shape  and  looked  like  a line  of  waves  ; it 
was  white-red  in  color.  The  sixth  ornament  was  presented 
by  Vayu  ; it  was  made  of  the  feathers  of  the  peacock  and 
looked  like  blue  clouds ; it  was  a bracelet  for  the  upper  arm. 

45*  The  seventh  ornament  was  presented  by  Subramania; 
it  was  his  own  bracelet  of  curious  make*  The  eighth  was 
presented  by  Agni ; it  was  of  the  color  of  fire. 

46.  The  ninth  w^s  presented  by  the  Moon  ; it  was  made 

of  a precious  stone  resembling  the  V'yduriya.  The  tenth  was 

presented  by  Twashta,  the  Sun ; it  looked  like  the  wheel  of 

¥ 

a chariot. 

47*  The  eleventh  was  presented  by  Visvadevas;  it  was 
of  the  shape  of  the  lotus  and  was  an  ear  ornament.  The 
twelfth  was  presented  by  the  Rishis ; it  was  of  the  color  of  the 
blue  lotus ; this  was  also  an  ear  ornament. 

48.  The  thirteenth  was  presented  by  Jupiter  and  Venus; 
it  was  a head  ornament ; it  was  a little  bent  both  at  the  top 
and  bottom,  but  broad  at  the  former  end  : it  was  red  and  was 
of  the  color  of  shellac* 

49.  The  several  ornaments  above  enumerated  have  for 
their  lords  the  several  Devas  by  whom  they  were  respectively 
presented. 

50.  The  first  ornament  shall  be  placed  at  a distance 
from  the  foot  equal  to  a third  of  the  circumference  of  the 
beam ; the  second  above  the  first  at  seven-eighths  of  the  dis- 
tance of  the  former  from  the  foot  of  the  beam  •,  the  third  above 
the  second  at  seven-eighths  of  the  distance  between  the  first 
and  second,  and  so  on. 

51*  On  the  fourth  day  the  ceremony  shall  be  completed. 
The  following  mantras,  quoted  by  Manu  and  found  in  the 
Shastras,  shall  then  be  recited  . — 


180 


BEIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  43* 


52.  As  thou  wert  at  one  time  pleased  to  accept  the 
gift  of  a variety  of  splendid  ornaments  made  by  the  Devas 
accompained  by  Siva^  the  Sun^  Yama,  Indra,  the  Moon,  Kubera, 
Agni,  Varuna,  the  Rishis,  the  Apsaras,  8ukra  (Venus  ),  Guru 
(Jupiter),  Subbramania  and  others,  so  we  request  thee  to  be 
pleased  to  accept  now  of  a similar  gift  from  us. 

54.  Thou  art  Vishnu,  the  deity  that  exists  throughout 
eternity, — the  all-pervading  principle — who  appeared  in  his 
Varaha  Avatar.  Thou  art  Yama,  Agni,  Hiranyagarbha,  Indra 
and  Jupiter. 

55.  I invoke  the  all-knowing  Agni,  the  protecting  Indra, 
the  lord  of  the  Devas,  who  is  known  under  the  names  of  Sakkra 
and  Vrittrahara,  that  our  heroes  mav  be  successful. 

56.  The  above  sacred  texts  are  to  be  recited  by  the  king 
fasting,  on  the  occasion  of  the  completion  of  the  ceremony,  of 
planting  the  pole,  on  its  entry  into  town  and  when  it  is  bathed 
and  adorned  with  flowers  and  at  the  closing  ceremony* 

57.  The  pole  shall  be  adorned  with  an  umbrella,  a flag, 
mirror,  fruits,  crescent-shaped  jewels,  garlands  of  flowers,  plan- 
tains, sugar-canes,  with  the  figure  of  the  tiger  and  of  the  lion, 
with  the  various  ornaments  already  mentioned, and  with  figures 
shaped  like  the  window,  together  with  the  figures  of  the  eight 
Dikpatis,  placed  around. 

58.  The  rope  shall  be  unbroken ; the  peg,  driven  into  the 
ground,  shall  be  of  strong  wood  •,  the  pole  shall  be  secured  at 
the  bottom  within  a strong  wooden  framework,  and  the  figures 
known  as  IndiVs  daughters  shall  also  be  of  strong  wood.  All 
these  having  been  secured  the  flag  shall  be  hoisted  up  amidst 
the  joyful  noise  of  the  people,  the  blessings  and  salutation  of 
the  priests,  the  loud  sound  of  the  kettle  drum,  of  tabor,  of 


CH.  43.]  BRIHAT  SAMHITA.  181 

conch-shell  and  other  musical  instruments,  the  sound  of  Vedic 
texts  chanted  by  the  Brahmins  and  in  the  absence  of  any 
inauspicious  sound. 

60.  The  people  shall  offer  with  both  their  hands  fruits, 
curdled  milk,  ghee,  fried  grain,  honey  and  flowers*  They  shall 
also  offer  their  salutations  and  praises  and  shall  assist  at  the 
ceremony.  'I’he  banner  shall  be  so  placed  that  its  end  might 
be  bent  a little  in  the  direction  of  the  enemy^s  city  that  he 
might  become  powerless. 

61.  If  the  banner  could  be  raised  neither  hurriedly  nor 
too  slowly  but  steadily.,;and  so  that  the  garlands  and  numerous 
ornaments  might  not  be  injured,  it  indicates  prosperity  to  the 
king ; if  otherwise  it  indicates  evil  which  the  priests  shall  take 
steps  to  avert  by  expiatory  ceremonies. 

62.  If  the  hawk,  the  owl,  pigeons,  crows  and  vultures 
should  settle  on  the  pole,  the  king  will  get  into  dangers  and 
diSiculties.  If  the  blue  jay  or  king-fisher  should  sit  at  the  top, 
the  first  prince  will  suffer.  If  a falcon  should  in  its  flight, 
strike  the  tip  of  the  pole,  the  king  will  lose  his  sight* 

63.  If  the  umbrella  should  break  and  fall  down,  the  king 
will  die.  If  bees  should  begin  to  deposit  honey  in  a corner, 
thieves  will  increase;  if  a meteoric  fall  should  occur  at  the  time, 
the  king^s  chaplain  will  die  ; if  a thunderblot  should  occur, 
the  queen  will  die. 

64.  If  the  flag  should  accidentally  fall  to  the  ground,  the 
queen  will  die  j if  any  of  the  ornaments  should  drop  down  there 
will  be  drought  in  the  land;  if  the  pole  should  break  in  the 
middle,  the  chief  minister  will  suffer  ; if  it  should  break  at  the 
top  the  king  will  suffer  ; and  if  at  the  bottom,  the  citizens  will 
suffer. 

65*  If  the  pole  should  accidentally  happen  to  be  surround- 
ed by  smoke,  there  will  be  fear  from  destructive  fires;  if  it 


182 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  44. 


should  be  surrounded  by  darkness^  the  land  will  fall  into  some 
serious  hallucination  ; if  the  figure  of  the  tiger  should  break 
and  fall,  ministers  will  suffer  *,  if  the  pole  should  break  and  fall 
towards  the  north,  east,  south  and  west,  the  Brahmins,  the 
Kshatriyas,  the  Vysias  and  the  Sudras  will  suffer  respec- 
tively* 

66.  If  the  rope  should  break  and  fall,  children  will  suffer ; 
if  the  figure  known  as  Indra’s  mother  should  fall,  the  king^s 
mother  will  die ; any  indications,  for  good  or  for  evil,  occur- 
ring at  the  time  and  connected  with  children  and  travellers, 
will  also  come  to  pass- 

67.  After  keeping  the  flag  hoisted  up  for  four  days,  on 
the  5th  day  the  king  shall,  after  due  Pooja  to  it,  have  the  flag 
brought  down,  and  thus  close  the  ceremony  for  the  well-being 
of  his  subjects  and  his  army. 

68.  That  prince  will  have  nothing  to  fear  from  his  ene- 
mies who  duly  respects  and  performs  the  ceremony  connected 
with  Indra  Dhwaja,  which  was  duly  performed  first  by  Vasu, 
king  of  Chedi,  who  was  gifted  with  the  power  of  flight  into 
celestial  regions  and  after  him  by  numerous  other  kings. 


CHAPTER  XLIV. 

On  the  Lustration  op  Akms** 

1.  Soon  after  Bhagavan  Vishnu  rises  f (from  bed)  to 
whom  the  clouds  form  as  eyebrows,  the  Sun  and  Moon  as  eyes, 
and  whose  naval  pit  is  like  the  lotus,  the  king  shall  perform  the 
ceremony  of  lustration  of  arms  for  the  health  and  well-being  of 
his  horses,  elephants  and  subjects. 


* A military  and  religious  ceremony  held  by  kings  before  taking  the  field. 

f.  This  is  the  11th  lunar  day  of  the  light  half  of  Krittika  when  Vishnu  rises 
from  sleep. 


CH.  44.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


183 


2.  The  ceremony  known  as  lustration  of  arms  shall  be 
performed  on  the  12th  or  the  8th  or  full  Moon  day  of  the  light 
half  of  the  month  of  Karttika  or  Aswayuja. 

3 On  some  pure  spot  in  the  north-eastern  part  of' the 
town  shall  be  constructed  a structure  of  fine  wood,  16  cubits 
high  and  10  cubits  square  at  the  top. 

4.  A lustration  room  also  be  constructed  of  the  timber  of 
Sala  and  of  Udumbara  as  main  beams,  and  of  the  branches  of 
the  Kakuba  for  rafters  and  cross-sticks,  and  of  a thick  coating 
of  grass  with  an  arch- way,  adorned  with  a matsya  dJvwaja 
constructed  of  bamboos. 

5«  Bhallataka}  rice,  coshta  and  Siddharta  (the  white  mus- 
tard) shall  together  be  tied  to  the  neck  of  horses  already  taken 
to  the  lustration  room,  by  means  of  a string  for  the  health  of 
these  animals. 

6*  Seven  days  shall  be  spent  in  the  worship  of  sacrificial 
fire  by  the  recitation  of  Vedic  hymns  sacred  to  the  Sun,  to 
Varuna,  to  Visvadeva,  to  Brahma,  to  Indra  and  to  Vishnu  for 
the  benefit  of  these  horses. 

7*  When  the  conch  and  other  musical  instruments  are 
sounded,  the  horses  should  not  be  allowed  to  get  frightened, 
nor  should  any  expressions  of  censure  be  directed  towards 
them,  nor  should  they  be  beaten. 

8.  On  the  8th  day,  to  the  south  of  the  wooden  structure 
and  east  of  the  shed  there  shall  be  formed  a platform  (a  fire 
place)  surrounded  by  Kusa  grass  and  the  bark  of  trees,  facing 
the  north. 

9.  The  king  shall  cause  to  be  put  into  the  pots  sandal 
paste,  Koshta,  samangaj  haritala,  manassila,  priyangu^  vacha, 
daiiti,  amrita)  anjana,  rajani,  suvarnapushpa,  and  agni~ 
mantha. 


Notes. — Stanzas  9 ; Koslita  : Costus  Arabicus,  known  in  Tamil  as  ib 

Samanga  : Bengal  madder;  iLi^&Osiri^. 

Haritala ; Sulphuret  of  arsenic:  ^ifj^rreOUi. 


184 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  44. 


10.  Also  the  roots  of  Sveta,  of  Purnahosa^  of  Katam- 
bhara,  of  Trayamana  and  of  Sahadevi ; also  the  plants  Naga- 
kusumaj  Swagupta,  Sabavaree,  and  Somarajee, 

11.  And  the  king  shall  cause  due  honors  to  be  paid  to 
the  pots,  offering  to  them  cakes  and  sweetmeats  made  of  honey, 
milk  and  flour. 

12* *  The  king  that  loves  wealth  shall  also  cause  to  be 
offered  to  the  fire,  Ahutis  of  the  dried  twigs  of  the  trees  Kadira, 
Palasa,  Oodumbara,  Kashmira  and  Aswatha  ; and  the  ghee 
vessels  shall  be  made  of  gold  or  silver. 


13*  The  king  shall  sit  on  tiger  skin  near  the  fire  facing 
the  east  with  horses,  physicians  and  astronomers  by  his  side* 

14.  The  laws  relating  to  the  fire  place  (V^edi),  to  priests 
and  to  fires  in  connection  with  the  Lustration  ceremony  are 
the  same  as  those  stated  in  connection  with  Yatra,  Grahayajna 
and  Indra  Dhwaja. 


15.  The  king  shall  adorn  with  white  new  cloths,  sandal 
paste,  perfumes  and  garlands,  both  elephants  and  horses  of 
good  breed  and  priests  who  have  bathed. 


Manassila  : Red  arsenic  : 

Priyangu : Panic  seed. 

Vacha;  Orris  root:  Qjs=li>Lj. 

Danti:  The  plant  Crotose  polyandrum  : 

Amrita  : Piper  longum  : 

Anjana : Sulphuret  of  Antimony. 

Rajani : Curcuma  louga  : LD^dF(^Q^iij(^, 

Suvarnapushpa  : The  Globe  amaranth,  serr 
Agnimantha:  Premna  spinosa : 

Notes. — Stanza  10  : Sveta  rAconitum  feron  : Qeu  ^^<SSfr<S0Sfr^^. 

Purnakosa  : Achyranthes  aspera  : jb  tr  itj  ^ sS . 

Katambhara : The  plant  Bignonia  Indica  : <s(£lsQ  ry  itSqsS, 

Trayamana  : a medicinal  plant  rCsesalpina  pulcherima  ; LonShrsO'Sir^'^ssr. 

• 1 1 Herbs  used  in  certain  rites  of  ablution  at  the  consecration  of  an 

idol:  ^ ^irOtPiEiS 0^^ IT, 

Nagakusuma:  Rottlera tinctoria : jbitsuu^, 

Swagupta  : plant  Mucuna  pruitus  S & it  sSl . 

Satavaree:  Asparagus  ra^cemosns  P 

Somarajee  : a medicinal  plant  Serratula  or  Vernonia  Anthelmintica. 

NoteSi.  Stanza  12 : TJdumbara  : fig  tree,  Ficus  glomerata  : j 
Kashmira  : Ficus  elastica  : oigSrcsfiLOjrzi). 

The  other  terms  have  already  been  explained — Vide  pp.  141  to  143. 


LajTLO, 


CH.  44.] 


BEIHAT  8AMHITA. 


185 


16.  He  shall,  addressing  kind  words  to  these  and  with 
the  music  of  the  conch-shell  and  other  instruments  take  them 
gently  to  the  platform  near  the  wooden  structure. 

17.  If  the  horse  thus  led  by  the  king  should  stand  with 
its  left  leg  lifted  from  the  ground,  the  king  would  easily  tri- 
umph over  his  enemies. 

18.  If  the  horse  should  get  frightened,  the  king  would 
suffer  miseries  ; the  effects  described  for  various  other  indica- 
tions connected  with  elephants  and  horses  in  the  work  on 
Yoga  Yatra  apply  equally  to  the  Lustration  of  arms. 

19.  The  priests  shall  give  to  the  horse  to  eat  a rice 
ball,  touching  the  same';  if  the  horse  should  either  smell  or 
eat  the  ball,  the  king  will  triumph  in  fight  and  will  suffer 
defeat  if  otherwise. 

20.  The  priest  shall  dip  a twig  of  the  glomerous  fig  tree 
into  the  water-jars  and  rub  it  over  the  bodies  of  the  horses, 
chanting  the  Santika  and  Poushtika  mantras  ; he  shall  simi- 
larly rub  the  twig  over  the  army,  the  elephants  and  the  king 
himself. 


21.  Besides,  for  the  prosperity  of  the  country,  the  priest, 
after  performing  homa  by  means  of  the  ahhicliara  mantras, 
shall,  with  the  spear,  stab  in  the  breast  a figure  of  the  enemy 
made  of  earth. 

22.  The  priest  shall  then  touch  with  his  fingers  the  bit 
of  the  bridle  and  put  it  in  the  horse’s  mouth.  The  king,  after 
purification  by  Lustration,  shall  get  on  the  back  of  the  horses 
and  attended  by  his  army,  shall  proceed  towards  the  north  and 
other  directions  for  purposes  of  conquest* 

23.  The  king  cheered  by  gentle  winds  rendered  odorous 
by  contact  with  the  juice  of  rutting  elephants ; pleased  with 

the  music  of  the  drum  and  conch-shell ; bright  as  the  rising 

24 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


186 


[CH.  45 


summer-sun  from  the  numerous  sparkling  gems  of  his  crown  ; 


24»  Resembling  mount  Meru  with  its  swans  from  the 
moving  chamara  on  both  sides  ; with  garlands  and  clothes 
moved  to  and  fro  by  the  chamara  air  made  sweet  by  contact 
with  sandal  paste ; 

25.  Beautiful  as  the  rainbow  from  the  various  hues  of  the 
light  issuing  from  diamonds  and  other  gems  of  his  crown^  ear 
pendants,  armlets  and  the  like  ; 

26*  Attended  by  horses  that  appear  to  soar  aloft  in  the 
sky,  by  elephants  that  with  their  tread  seem  to  cleave  the 
earth  and  by  soldiers  resembling  a host  of  the  Devas  after  suc- 
cessful battle,  himself  like  Indra  shall  march  on  horseback  for 
purposes  of  conquest ; 

27*  Or,  adorned  with  jewels  set  with  diamonds  and 
pearls,  with  white  garlands,  turban,  sandal  paste  and  clothes ; 
with  the  white  umbrella  spread  over  his  head  and  mounted  on 
the  back  of  a huge  black  elephant,  thus  resembling  the  bright 

Venus  with  the  moon  near  it  and  "over  the  dark  clouds,  he 
shall  march  for  conquest. 

28.  The  king  who  marches  for  conquest  attended  by  foot 
soldiers,  cavalry  and  elephants,  all  in  high  spirits  and  with 
numerous  bright  weapons  of  war,  striking  terror  into  the 
heart  of  the  enemy,  shall  easily  conquer  the  earth. 


CHAPTER  XLV. 

On  the  Wagtail.* 

1.  I shall  here  state  the  effects  of  the  first  appearance  of 
the  bird  known  as  Khanjana  (wagtail)  on  the  king’s  march 
as  stated  by  Rishis. 

* The  bird  is  known  as  Khanjana  in  Sanscrit.  It  is  a species  of  wagtail. 
Mounta  alia,  Alba. 


CH.  45.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


187 


2.  If  the  bird  be  one  of  the  species  possessing  a large 
body  and  a long  and  black  neck,  it  is  known  as  Bhadra  ; it 
forebodes  good-luck;  if  it  be  one  of  the  species  black  up  to 
the  neck  or  face,  it  is  known  as  Sampoorna  ; it  forebodes 
success* 

3.  If  it  be  one  of  the  species  with  a dark  spot  in  the 

neck  and  with  white  che‘eks,  it  is  known  as  Rikta;  it  fore- 
bodes evil.  If  it  be  yellow,  it  is  known  as  Gopeeta ; it  also 
forebodes  evil*  * 

4*  If  it  be  seen  oh  trees  of  sweet  fruits  and  fragrant 

¥ 

flowers  or  close  to  sacred  water,  or  on  the  heads  of  elephants, 
horses  and  serpents,  on  the  tops  of  temples  and  on  the  king’s 
palace,  in  flower  gardens  or  on  the  mansions  of  the  rich  ; 

5*  Near  cows,  cowpens,  gatherings  of  Sadhus  or  holy- 
men,  sacrificial  fire-sites,  festival  places,  kings.  Brahmins, 
elephant-sheds,  horse-sheds,  an  umbrella,  a flag-staff,  a cha- 
mara  and  the  like ; 

6.  Near  gold,  white  cloth,  places  adorned  with  the  lotus 
and  the  water  lily,  in  places  washed  with  cowdung,  on  vessels 
containing  curdled  milk  or  on  heaps  of  grain,  it  forebodes 
prosperity  to  the  king. 

7*  If  it  be  seen  near  swampy  places,  the  king  would  eat 
sumptuous  meals ; if  on  cowdung,  he  will  get  a good  supply 
of  milk  and  curd;  if  on  green  turf  he  would  get  good  cloths 
and  if  on  chariots,  he  would  leave  his  kingdom* 

8*  If  it  be  seen  seated  on  the  tops  of  houses,  the  king 
would  lose  his  wealth  ; if  on  snares,  he  would  be  impri- 
soned ; if  on  impure  places,  he  would  suffer  from  disease ; and 
if  on  the  back  of  the  sheep,  he  would  soon  obtain  his  desired 

object* 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


188 


[CH.  45. 


9.  If  ifc  should  be  seen  seated  on  the  back  of  a buffalo,  a 
camel,  an  ass,  on  the  bones  of  animals,  on  cremation  grounds, 
in  the  corners  of  houses,  on  pebbles  or  gravels,  on  rocks,  on 
the  walls  of  towns,  on  ash  or  on  hair,  there  would  be  deaths, 
diseases  and  fears  in  the  land. 


10.  If  it  should  be  seen  when  it  is  shaking  off  its  wings, 
there  would  be  misery  in  the  land ; if  when  in  the  act  of  drink- 
ing water  from  the  river,  there  would  be  prosperity;  there 
would  also  be  prosperity  if  seen  about  sun-rise ; and  if  about 
sun-set,  there  would  be  misery  in  the  land* 

11*  If  the  king  should  march  in  the  direction  in  which 
the  wagtail  should  be  seen  to  fly  immediately  after  the  Lustra- 
tion ceremony  is  over,  he  would  triumph  over  his  enemies. 

12*  Where  the  wagtail  should  be  seen  to  copulate,  there 
would  be  treasure  in  the  ground  under ; where  it  should  be 
found  to  vomit,  there  will  be  crystal  beads  in  the  ground 
under  it ; where  it  passes  stool,  there  would  be  found  charcoal 
under  ground;  these  may  be  found  to  be  the  case  on  actual 
examination. 


13.  If  the  wagtail  should  be  found  dead,  the  king  would 
die;  if  of  broken  limbs,  the  king  would  suffer  similarly;  if 
covered  with  wounds,  a similar  fate  will  befall  the  king;  if 
found  to  enter  its  nest,  the  king  would  get  wealth  and  if  per- 
ceived in  its  flight  his  relatives  will  visit  him* 

14*  If  the  king  should  chance  to  see  in  some  pure  spot 
a wagtail  foreboding  good,  he  shall  then  and  there  perform 
pooja  on  the  ground  with  sandal  paste,  flower  and  perfumed 
smoke ; he  is  then  sure  to  prosper. 

15.  If  he  should  chance  to  see  a wagtail  foreboding  evil, 
he  shall  perform  pooja  to  Brahmins,  preceptors,  yogis  and  the 


CH.  46.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


189 


Devas  3 he  will  escape  the  evil  effects.  He  shall  abstain  from 
meat  for  seven  days. 

16.  The  effects  of  the  first  appearance  of  the  wagtail  will 
come  to  pass  within  a year ; if  during  this  peroid  the  wagtail 
should  be  seen  again^  the  effects  of  such  second  sight  will  come 
to  pass  that  same  day  before  sunset.  In  making  predictions  from 
the  wagtail  the  astrologer  shall  take  into  account  the  direction 
of  its  flighty  its  place,  body,  the  rising  Zodiacal  sign  at  the 
time,  the  Nakshatra  or  the  Moon^s  place  at  the  time,  and 
whether  the  bird  is  seen  with  its  face  turned  to  the  sun  or 

V 

away  from  the  sun. 

CHAPTER  XL VI. 

On  Portents. 

A 

Portents  connected  luith  idols  or  statues  of  the  Devas  in 
the  Temples, 

1.  I shall  now  proceed  to  state  the  laws  relating  to  por- 
tents which  Bhagavan  Garga  taught  to  Attri ; what  follows  is 
a summary  of  the  same. 

2.  Mankind,  because  of  their  sins,  suffer  misfortunes, 
and  the  approach  of  these  is  indicated  by  portents,  stellar,  at- 
mospheric and  terrestrial. 

3.  Mankind  by  their  misdeeds,  offend  the  Devas,  and  the 
Devas  send  down  portents  to  indicate  their  displeasure ; the 
king  shall  perform  expiatory  rites  for  the  redress  of  the  mise-^ 
ries  which  otherwise  are  sure  to  befall  mankind. 

4.  Unusual  phenomena  connected  with  the  planets  and 
stars  are  known  as  stellar  portents.  Meteors,  thunderblots, 
tempests,  halos,  cloud-castles,  rainbows  and  the  like  are  known 
as  atmospheric  portents. 


190 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  46. 


5.  Any  UDUsual  phenomena  connected  with  both  mov- 
able and  immovable  terrestrial  objects  are  known  as  terrestial 
portents.  The  effects  of  these  can  be  avoided  by  means  of 
expiatory  rites^  whereas  the  effects  of  atmospheric  portents  can 
only  be  softened  by  such  ceremonies,  and  in  the  opinion  of 
some  the  effects  of  stellar  portents  cannot  be  avoided  or  sof- 
tened by  any  means. 

6.  Our  own  opinion  is  that  even  stellar  portents  can 
be  assuaged  in  the  rigour  of  their  effects  by  large  gifts  of 
gold,  food,  cows  and  lands,  and  by  drawing  down  the  milk  of 
on  the  temple  floor  and  by  a crore  of  ahutis  in  the  sacred  cows 
fire. 

7.  The  king,  in  consequence  of  his  sins  in  his  former 
birth,  will  be  afflicted  in  his  own  person,  in  his  children, 
treasury,  vehicles,  citizens,  wives,  priests  and  subjects  at 
large. 

8.  If  the  Linga  and  the  idols  of  the  Devas  in  the  temple 
should  for  no  apparent  cause  break,  move,  perspire,  shed 
tears,  fall  down,  speak  or  do  the  like,  the  king’s  country 
would  suffer  miseries. 

9.  If  on  festive  occasions  the  car,  the  axle,  the  wheel, 
the  yoke,  or  the  flag  should  break  or  fall,  or  if  any  of  them 
should  be  found  to  have  been  removed  from  its  place  and 
another  put  in  its  stead,  or  if  the  tie  should  break  and  the 
parts  get  loose  or  if  the  car  should  stick  into  the  ground  and 
refuse  to  move,  the  king  will  suffer  with  his  country. 

10.  Portents  connected  with  the  idols  or  statues  of  the 
Rishis,  of  Yama,  the  Pitridevas  and  of  Brahma  will  affect  the 
Brahmins,  the  Kshatryas  and  the  Vysias.  Those  connected 
with  the  statues  of  Rudra  and  the  Dik  Palakas  will  affect  the 
lower  animals. 

11.  Portents  connected  with  the  statues  of  Jupiter, 
Venus  and  Saturn  will  affect  the  family  priest.  Those  con- 
nected with  the  statue  of  Vishnu,  will  affect  mankind  at  large. 


CH.  46.] 


BEIHAT  SAMHITA. 


191 


Portents  connected  with  the  statues  of  Skanda  and  Visaka  will 
affect  the  provincial  rulers. 

12.  Portents  connected  with  the  statue  of  Vedavyasa 
will  affect  the  ministers;  those  connected  with  the  statue  of 
Vinayaka  will  affect  the  commanders  of  armies  ; those  con- 
nected with  the  statues  of  Dhata  and  Vidhata  indicate  the  des- 
truction of  the  world.  • 

13.  Portents  connected  with  the  statues  of  the  sons^ 
daughters;  wives  and  servants  of  the  Devas  will  affect  the 
king^s  sonS;  daughters,  wives  and  servants. 

14.  Portents  connected  with  the  statues  of  the  Rak- 
shasas;  the  Pisachas,  the  Yakshas  and  the  Nagas  will  affect  as 
before  the  king’s  sons,  daughters,  wives  and  servants.  The 
above  will  all  take  effect  within  eight  months. 

15.  When  any  unusual  phenomena  portentous  in  their 
nature  occur  in  connection  with  the  statues  of  Devas  in  tem- 
ples, the  priests  shall  bathe  and  fast  for  3 days,  and  with  a 
pious  mind  also  bathe  the  statues  in  water  and  adorn  them 
with  flowers,  sandal  paste,  cloth  and  the  like. 

16.  He  shall  satisfy  the  Devas  by  the  offer  of  Mad- 
huparka,*  sweetmeats  and  cooked  rice,  and  he  shall  throw 
ahiitis  of  boiled  rice  into  the  fire,  chanting  mantras  appro- 
priate to  the  several  Devas. 

17.  That  king  who  for  seven  days  shall  perform  homa, 
feed  Brahmins  and  worship  the  Devas  accompanied  by  music 
and  dance,  and  who  shall  present  large  sums  of  money  to  the 
Brahmins,  shall  be  freed  from  the  effects  of  all  his  sins* 

B. 

Portents  connected  with  fire. 

18*  That  prince  will  suffer  with  his  kingdom  in  whose 
province  a fire  breaks  out  where  there  is  no  fire  or  fire  ceases 
to  burn  even  when  fed  with  fuel. 


* Madhuparka  : a mixture  of  honey  and  clarified  butter. 


192 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  46. 


19.  If  either  water  or  flesh  or  any  wet  substance  should 
catch  fire  and  burn^  the  king  will  suffer  miseries ; if  weapons 
of  war  should  catch  fire  and  burn^  there  would  be  war  in  the 
land. 

20.  If  temples  and  palaces  of  kings  or  the  mansions  of 
the  rich,  archways  or  gates,  flag  staff  and  the  like  should  catch 
fire  and  burn,  or  if  these  should  do  so  being  struck  by  light- 
ning, there  would  surely  be  a foreign  invasion  of  the  land  6 
months  after  the  occurrence. 

21.  If  smoke  should  appear  in  a place  where  there  is  no 
fire,  or  if  a dust  storm  or  darkness  should  cover  the  land  during 
day  time,  or  if  the  stars  should  be  invisible  at  night  when  the 
sky  is  cloudless,  or  if  the  stars  should  be  visible  during  the  day 
time,  mankind  will  be  subject  to  various  fears. 

22.  If  fire  should  break  out  for  no  apparent  cause,  towns, 
quadrupeds,  birds  and  men  will  suffer.  If  beds,  clothes  or  the 
hair  on  one’s  head  should  be  seen  to  smoke  or  with  sparks  of 
fire,  there  would  be  deaths  in  the  land. 

23.  If  weapons  of  war  should  be  seen  to  catch  fire,  or 
become  like  snakes,  or  should  sound  or  come  out  of  their  case 
or  quiver,  there  will  be  fearful  wars  in  the  land. 

24.  When  portents  connected  with  fire  occur  the  king 
shall  satisfy  god  Agni  by  homa  ceremonies,  throwing  into  the 
fire  ahutis  of  the  twigs  of  milky  trees,  of  mustard  seed  and  of 
ghee  and  he  shall  present  gold  to  the  Brahmins. 

C. 

Portents  connected  with  trees* 

25»  If  the  branches  of  trees  should  break  and  fall  down 
for  no  apparent  cause,  there  would  be  wars  in  the  land ; if 
the  trees  should  be  heard  to  laugh,  the  king  would  quit  his 
dominions ; if  they  should  be  heard  to  weep,  diseases  would 
increase. 


CH.  46.] 


BRJHAT  SAMHITA. 


193 


26.  If  the  trees  should  bear  fruits  or  flowers  in  the  wrong 
season,  the  country  will  be  attacked  by  the  enemy  ; if  young 
trees  should  blossom,  children  will  perish  ; if  the  juice  of  trees 
should  ooze  out,  all  articles  will  sufler. 

27.  If  toddy  should  ooze  out  from  trees,  the  king^s  vehi- 
cles will  suffer  injuries  ; if  blood  should  ooze  out,  there  will  be 
wars  in  the  land  j if  hone}^,  mankind  will  suffer  from  diseases; 
if  oil,  there  will  be  famine,  and  if  water,  there  will  be  great 
fears. 

28.  If  a dead  tree  should  sprout  and  grow,  or  if  a living 
tree  should  suddenly  die,  there  will  be  decrease  of  strength 
and  food  in  the  land  ; if  a tree  which  has  fallen  should  rise  of 
itself,  there  will  be  fear. from  diseases. 

29.  If  the  superior  trees  should  bear  blossoms  or  fruits  in 
the  wrong  season,  or  if  such  trees  should  catch  fire  or  smoke, 
kings  will  be  killed. 

30.  If  trees  should  grow  like  serpents  or  talk,  mankind 
will  suffer  death.  In  the  case  of  portents  connected  with  trees, 
the  effects  will  begin  to  be  felt  after  ten  months. 

31.  For  the  expiation  of  the  evils  the  priests  shall  honor 
the  tree  with  flowers,  sandal  paste,  perfumed  smoke,  cloths, 
and  the  like,  and  hold  an  umbrella  over  it,  and  placing  a Siva- 
linga  at  its  foot  shall  perform  Rudrajapa  and  offer  to  the  fire 
six  ahutis  in  honor  of  Rudra. 

32.  The  king  shall  feed  Brahmins  with  rice  cooked  in 
milk,  with  honey  and  with  ghee.  In  the  case  of  portents 
connected  with  trees,  the  Rishis  have  directed  that  the  king 
shall  make  gifts  of  land  to  the  Brahmins. 

D. 

Portents  connected  with  Crops* 

33*  If  the  stem  or  stock  of  the  lotus,  barley  and  the  like 
should  be  found  to  divide  into  branches  or  if  crops  should  bear 
double  fruits  or  double  flowers,  the  owner  or  proprietor  of  the 
land  will  die. 


25 


194 


BKIHAT  samhita. 


[cH.  46. 


34‘  If  crops  should  grow  over-laxuriantly,  or  if  a single 
tree  should  bear  a variety  of  fruits  or  flowerS;,  the  country  will 
be  invaded  by  the  enemy. 

35.  If  the  gingelly  should  yield  double  the  usual  quan- 
tity of  oil,  or  if  such  seed  should  contain  no  oil,  or  if  rice 
should  be  found  without  flavor,  mankind  will  suffer  from  great 
fears. 

36.  Flowers  or  fruits  portentous  in  their  nature  should 
be  removed  beyond  the  limits  of  the  village  or  town.  In  such 
cases,  the  priests  shall  satisfy  God  Soma  by  the  offer  of  rice 
ahutis  to  the  fire  or  by  animal  sacrifices. 

37.  In  the  case  of  any  portents  connected  with  crops, 
both  the  crops  and  the  land  should  be  presented  to  the  Brah- 
mins. In  the  middle  of  the  very  land  the  king  shall  satisfy 
the  Earth  by  the  offer  to  the  fire  of  rice  ahuti : the  evils  will 
then  disappear. 

E. 

Portents  connected  with  rainfall* 

38.  Drought  forebodes  famine ; excessive  rain  forebodes 
sujffering  from  hunger  and  foreign  invasion ; rainfall  in  the 
wrong  season  forebodes  disease,  and  rainfall  from  a cloudless 
sky  forebodes  the  king^s  assassination. 

39.  When  the  seasons  are  otherwise  good,  the  presence 
of  heat  in  the  place  of  cold  or  that  of  cold  in  the  place  of  heat, 
or  the  absence  of  either,  forebodes  that  6 months  after  and 
through  supernatural  means  the  kingdom  will  be  in  danger  and 
mankind  will  suffer  from  diseases. 

40.  If  there  should  be  continued  rain  for  7 days  in  a 
wrong  season,  the  chief  minister  and  the  sovereign  will  die ; 
if  there  should  fall  a shower  of  blood,  armed  men  will  engage 
in  fight  j if  there  should  fall  a shower  of  flesh,  bones,  or  mar- 
row, mankind  will  suffer  from  pox  or  plague* 

41.  If  there  should  fall  a shower  of  grain,  gold,  skin, 
fruits,  flowers  or  the  like,  mankind  will  suffer  from  various 


CH.  46.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


195 


fears,  and  if  there  should  fall  a shower  of  charcoal  or  dust,  the 
town  will  perish. 

42.  If  when  the  sky  is  cloudless,  there  should  fall  a shower 
of  stones  or  of  creatures  of  unusual  appearance,  or  if  there 
should  be  either  a drought  or  excessive  rain,  the  crops  will 
suffer  injuries  known  as  Eetibadha.* 

43.  If  there  should  fall  a shower  of  milk,  ghee,  honey, 

curdled  milk,  blood  or  warm  water,  the  country  will  meet 
with  ruin  ; in  the  case  of  a shower  of  blood,  the  king  will  be 
at  war.  * 

44.  If  when  the  sun  shines  bright  and  when  he  is  not  hid 
by  clouds  or  the  like,  objects  should  be  found  to  cast  no  sha- 
dows at  all,  or  if  the  shd-dows  should  be  of  wrong  shapes,  the 
country  will  suffer  from  various  fears. 

45.  If  when  the  sky  is  without  clouds,  the  rainbow 
should  appear  at  day  or  night  in  the  east  or  west,  there  will  be 
a great  famine  in  the  land. 

46.  In  the  case  of  portents  connected  with  showers,  the 
priest  shall  perform  homa  in  honour  of  the  Sun  and  of  the 
deities  presiding  over  the  clouds  and  the  winds  ; and  the 
king  shall  also  give  to  the  Brahmins  grain,  rice,  cows  and 
gold. 

F. 

Portents  connected  with  Water* 

47.  If  rivers  should,  in  course  of  time,  recede  from 
towns,  or  if  deep  lakes  in  the  neighbourhood  should  become 
dry,  such  towns  would  be  deserted  by  the  inhabitants. 

48.  If  rivers  should  be  seen  to  run  carrying  oil,  blood  or 
flesh,  or  if  the  water  should  be  found  very  muddy,  or  if  they 
should  be  seen  to  run  in  opposite  directions,  there  would  be 
foreign  invasion  of  the  country  after  six  months. 

49.  If  wells  should  be  found  to  blaze,  to  smoke,  to  boil, 

* Eetibadha  : plague,  distress,  drought,  exeessive  raiu,  swarm  of  rats  and 
foreign  invasion. 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


196 


[CH.  46* 


to  weep,  to  call,  to  sing  or  to  spring  mankind  would  sufiper 
from  plague  or  pox. 

50*  If  water  should  be  found  to  spring  from  places  un- 
dug, or  if  its  smell  or  flavor  should  suffer  change,  there  would 
be  great  fears  in  the  land  ; if  any  unusual  phenomena  should 
occur  near  pieces  of  water,  there  would  also  be  great  fears. 
The  king  shall  perform  expiatory  rites  in  the  very  places  as 
prescribed  below. 

51.  In  the  case  of  portents  connected  with  water,  the 
priest  shall  perform  homa  in  honor  of  Varuna,  reciting  the 
mantras  sacred  to  him. 

G. 

Portents  connected  with  Births. 

52.  If  two,  three,  four  or  more  children  should  be  born 
to  a woman  at  a time,  or  if  the  offspring  should  be  of  defective 
organs,  or  if  it  should  be  born  with  extra  organs,  the  country 
would  suffer  miseries  as  well  as  the  family. 

53.  If  a mare,  a she-camel,  a buffaloe  or  a cow  should 
bear  twins,  these  animals  would  perish  after  six  months  ; in 
the  case  of  portents  connected  with  births,  Garga  has  prescrib- 
ed, in  two  stanzas,  certain  expiatory  rites  : 

54.  He  (the  husband)  who  desires  prosperity  should 
banish  the  woman  to  foreign  lands  and  should  satisfy  Brah- 
mins by  the  gift  of  what  they  are  fond  of,  and  shall  also  per- 
form expiatory  homa  ceremonies. 

55.  In  the  case  of  quadrupeds,  they  too  shall  be  sepa- 
rated from  the  herd  and  expelled  to  foreign  lands  ; if  not, 
the  ruler  of  the  towns  as  well  as  the  herd  of  cattle  would 
perish. 

H. 

Portents  connected  with  Quadrupeds. 

56.  Among  quadrupeds  if  an  animal  of  one  species 
should  copulate  with  one  of  another  and  procreate  issues,  cows 
and  birds  would  suffer  ; if  either  bulls  or  cows  or  dogs  should 
suck  each  other. 


CH.  46.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


197 


57.  There  would  be  foreign  invasion  of  the  country  after 
three  months*  Garga  has  prescribed,  in  two  stanzas,  certain 
expiatory  rites  : 

58.  The  animals  shall  either  be  rejected  or  expelled  to 
foreign  lands  or  given  away  to  others.  The  Brahmins  shall 
also  be  satisfied  with  presents.  Japa  and  Homa  ceremonies 
shall  also  be  performed* 

59.  The  priest  shall  satisfy  God  Dhata  by  the  offer  to 

fire  of  rice  and  by  animal  sacrifice  by  means  of  the  Prajapatya 
mantras ; Brahmins  ^hall  also  be  fed  largely  and  given 
money.  ^ 

^ I 
¥ 

Portents 'Connected  loith  the  Wind* 

60.  If  vehicles  should  move  when  not  drawn  by  horses 
or  other  animals,  or  if  they  should  refuse  to  move  when  so 
drawn,  the  country  would  suffer  from  various  fears  and  the 
army  would  perish. 

61.  If,  when  unstruck,  instruments  of  music  should  be 
heard  to  sound,  or  if  they  should  not  sound  when  struck  or 
produce  wrong  sounds,  there  would  be  foreign  invasion  or  the 
reigning  sovereign  would  perish. 

62.  If  vocal  or  instrumental  music  or  the  sound  of  the 
drum  or  any  other  mysterious  noise  should  be  heard  in  the 
sky,  or  if  moving  objects  should  refuse  to  move  and  immov- 
able objects  begin  to  move,  or  if  a drum  should  be  found  to  be 
mute  when  struck,  the  ruler  would  suffer  death,  disease  or 
defeat  in  battle. 

63.  If  monkey-apes  should  be  seen  to  copulate,  or  if  lad- 
les, winnowing  baskets  or  other  utensils  should  be  heard  to 
sound  in  an  unusual  manner,  or  if  a jackal  should  be  heard  to 
howl,  there  would  be  wars  in  which  armed  men  would  engage 
in  fight,  according  to  the  sages. 

64.  In  the  case  of  portents  connected  with  the  wind  the 
king  shall  worship  a representation  of  God  Vayu  made  of  the 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


198 


[CH.  46* 


flour  of  barley,  and  shall  have  the  five  mantras  beginning  with 
^^Avayo^’  recited  by  Brahmins. 

65.  He  shall  satisfy  the  Brahmins  by  feeding  them  with 
rice  cooked  in  milk  and  by  the  gift  of  money  to  them,  and 
rice-homa  ceremonies  shall  also  be  performed  and  the  officiat- 
ing Brahmin  shall  be  paid  liberally. 

J. 

Portents  connected  with  Animals  and  Birds. 

66.  If  country  birds  should  begin  to  dwell  in  woods,  or  if 
wild  birds  should  begin  to  dwell  in  towns,  or  if  day  birds 
should  be  found  to  move  about  at  night  or  if  night  birds 
should  be  found  to  move  about  during  the  day, 

67.  If  either  animals  or  birds  should  be  found  to  move 
in  circles  either  immediately  before  sunrise  or  after  sunset,  or 
if  they  should  herd  together  and  howl  in  the  direction  of  the 
sun,  the  country  would  sufier  miseries* 

68.  If  dogs  should  be  found  to  cry  at  the  gates  of  houses 
in  a weeping  tone,  or  if  jackals  should  be  found  to  howl  facing 
the  sun,  or  if  a dove  or  owl  should  enter  the  palace  of  the 
king, 

69.  If  the  cock  should  be  heard  to  cry  soon  after  sun-set, 
or  if  the  cuckoo  should  be  heard  to  cry  in  the  hemanta  (cold) 
season,  or  if  the  hawk  and  the  like  birds  should  be  found  to 
move  in  circles  from  right  to  left,  there  would  be  misery  in 
the  land. 

70.  If  birds  should  swarm  about  houses,  places  of  wor- 
ship, towers  or  gates,  or  if  honey-combs  or  ant-hills  or  lotus 
should  be  found  to  be  formed  or  to  grow  in  such  places,  there 
would  be  misery  in  the  land. 

71.  If  dogs  should  bring  within  human  dwellings  bones 
or  limbs  of  dead  bodies,  there  would  be  plague  in  the  land.  If 
animals  and  weapons  should  be  found  to  speak,  the  king  would 
die ; and  the  Rishes  of  old  say  as  follows  : 

72.  In  the  case  of  portents  connected  with  birds  and 


CH.  46.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


199 


animals  homa  (fire)  ceremonies  shall  be  performed,  and  the 
officiating  Brahmins  shall  well  be  paid.  Five  Brahmins  shall 
be  appointed  to  recite  the  mantra  beginning  with  Devah- 

73*  A large  number  of  cows  shall  be  presented  to  Brah- 
mins, each  gift  being  made  by  the  recitation  of  the  mantra 
beginning  with  Sudeva*^^  The  Brahmins  shall  also  be  made 
to  recite  Sakunisooktam  as  well  as  the  Upanishads  and  the 
Sivasankalpa  mantras. 

, K. 

Miscellaneous  portents^ 

74.  If  Indra’s  banner,  bolts,  pillars  or  gates  should  break 
or  fall  down,  or  if  doors,  towers,  flag-staffs  should  break  or  fall 
down,  the  king  would  die* 

75*  If  both  the  morning  and  evening  sky  should  appear 
to  be  burning,  or  if  there  should  be  smoke  in  the  forest  where 
there  is  no  fire,  or  if  ditches  should  appear  in  places  where 
there  were  none  before,  or  if  earthquakes  should  occur,  there 
would  be  misery  in  the  land* 

76.  That  the  country  would  suffer  miseries  whose  ruler 
respects  heretics  or  atheists,  or  who  refuses  to  follow  the  rules 
of  life  observed  by  the  great  and  holy  men  of  the  land,  or  who 
is  of  an  irascible  temper,  or  who  is  jealous  or  fearful  and  who 
is  inclined  to  quarrel  with  his  subjects* 

77*  That  country  will  also  suffer  in  which  children  are 
found  with  weapons,  pieces  of  wood  or  sticks  in  their  hands 
beating  (animals)  and  uttering  such  expressions  as  beat,  kill, 
cut,  break  and  the  like* 

78*  That  house  will  meet  with  ruin  in  whose  walls  figures 
of  dead  men  or  of  the  nlaster  of  the  house  is  drawn  with  char- 
coal or  red  chalk* 

79*  That  house  will  also  suffer  miseries  in  which  is  seen 
the  spideFs  web  or  which  is  not  swept  clean  and  adorned  with 


200 


BRIHAT  SAMEITA. 


[CH.  46. 


flowers  both  morning  and  evening,  or  in  which  there  is  con- 
stant quarrel  between  persons,  or  where  the  lady  of  the  house 
is  for  ever  dirty. 

80»  If  Rakshasas  are  seen,  there  will  be  plague  in  the 
land.  Garga  has  prescribed  ceremonies  for  the  expiation  of 
the  evils  of  all  miscellaneous  portents. 

81*  The  eighteen  Mahasanti  ceremonies  (great  ceremo- 
nies of  expiation)  prescribed  in  the  Adharvana  Veda  must  be 
performed.  Bali  (food)  shall  also  be  offered  in  honor  of  Indra 
and  Indrani  (Indra^s  queen)  who  shall  also  be  worshipped  in 
every  month. 

L. 

Phenomena  luhich  are  not  f orients* 

82.  If  after  the  occurrence  of  a portentous  phenomenon, 
either  the  king  should  die  or  the  country  should  suffer  mise- 
ries, or  if  a comet  should  appear,  or  a solar  or  lunar  eclipse 
should  occur,  or  if  the  phenomenon  is  one  due  to  the  particular 
season,  the  evils  described  for  such  phenomenon  would  not 
come  to  pass. 

83.  What  phenomena  are  not  portents  but  are  due  to  the 
particular  seasons  are  briefly  stated  by  the  sons  of  Rishis  (in 
the  following  12  stanzas*) 

84.  If  in  the  Vasanta  Ritu  (April — May)  there  should 
occur  a thunderbolt  or  an  earthquake,  or  if  the  roar  of  thun- 
der should  be  heard  immediately  before  sun-rise  and  after  sun- 
set, or  if  the  appearance  of  a halo,  dust-storm  or  smoke  should 
be  seen,  or  if  the  Sun  should  appear  very  red  both  at  rising 
and  setting  ; 

85.  Or  if  trees  should  yield  food,  juice,  oil,  honey,  flowers 
or  fruits,  and  if  cows  and  birds  should  appear  lustful,  there 
would  be  prosperity  in  the  land. 

86.  If  in  the  Greeshma  Ritu  (summer)  shooting  stars 
and  meteors  should  fall,  and  the  discs  of  the  sun  and  moon 


CH.  46.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


201 


should  appear  brown,  or  if  things  should  appear  to  burn  or 
smoke  or  covered  with  sparks,  in  the. absence  of  fire,  or  if  the 
sky  should  be  full  of  dust  or  disturbed  by  the  wind  ; 

87*  Or  if  the  red  sky  of  the  morning  and  evening  should 
appear  disturbed  and  agitated  as  the  sea,  or  if  rivers  should 
fall  or  become  dry,  there  would  be  prosperity  in  the  land. 

88.  If  in  the  winter  season  such  appearance  as  the  rain- 

bow, halos  and  lightning  should  mark  the  sky,  or  if  a dead 
tree  should  sprout  and  grow,  or  earth-quakes  occur,  or  elevat- 
ed grounds  should  becpme  hollow  or  hollow  grounds  should 
become  elevated,  or  if  mysterious  noise  should  be  heard  from 
below  the  earth,  or  if  ditches  should  be  formed  on  the  surface 
of  the  earth  ; - f 

89.  Or  if  tanks,  rivers,  ponds  and  the  like  should  be 
flooded  with  water,  or  if  such  water  should  overflow  the  banks, 
or  if  land-slips  occur  or  houses  should  break  and  fall,  there 
would  be  no  cause  for  fear. 

90.  If  in  the  Sarat  Ritu  (October  and  November)  the 
wives  of  the  Devas,  or  the  Demons,  the  Gandharvas  or  the  ve- 
hicles of  the  Devas  should  appear  in  the  sky,  or  if  during  the 
day  the  planets,  the  constellations,  or  any  of  the  stars  should 
become  visible ; 

91.  Or  if  music,  vocal  or  instrumental,  should  be  heard 
in  forests  or  on  hills,  or  if  crops  should  thrive  or  water  de- 
crease in  quantity,  there  would  be  no  cause  for  fear. 

92.  If  in  the  Hemanta  Ritu  (December  and  January) 
cold  winds  should  blow  or  snow  should  fall,  or  if  animals  and 
birds  should  be  heard  to  cry,  or  if  Rakshasas  and  Yakshas 
should  be  seen  or  voice  should  be  heard  in  the  sky  ; 

93.  Or  if  the  horizon,  the  sky,  the  forests  and  mountains 
should  appear  dark  as  if  covered  with  smoke,  or  if  the  Sun 
should  be  invisible  both  at  rising  and  setting,  there  will  be 
prosperity  in  the  land. 


26 


202 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  47. 


94.  If  in  the  Sisira  Ritu  (February  and  March)  snow 
should  fall  or  portents  connected  with  air  should  occur,  or  any 
unusual  or  wonderful  appearances  should  be  seen,  or  if  the  sky 
should  appear  black  as  collyrium,  or  if  shooting  stars  or  me- 
teors should  fall ; 

95.  If  women  should  give  birth  to  children  of  unnatural 
form,  or  if  cows,  sheep,  horses,  deer  or  birds  should  do  the 
same,  or  if  leaves,  sprouts  or  creepers  should  be  of  unnatural 
appearance,  there  would  be  prosperity  in  the  land. 

96*  If  unusual  phenomena,  due  to  particular  seasons,  oc- 
cur in  such  seasons,  there  would  be  prosperity  in  the  land,  and  if 
they  occur  in  other  seasons,  there  would  be  misery  in  the  land. 

97.  The  utterances  of  mad  men,  of  children  and  of  wo- 
men will  never  fail  to  come  to  pass- 

98.  .Words  of  truth  are  to  be  found  in  the  Devas,  from 
them  they  come  to  men ; human  words  are  therefore  prompted 
by  the  Devas  and  are  therefore  true* 

99*  Even  though  ignorant  of  astronomy  and  astrology, 
if  a person  should  be  well  learned  in  the  laws  of  portents,  he 
would  become  famous  and  would  be  liked  by  the  king.  I have 
thus  stated  the  secret  views  of  the  Rishis  by  a thorough  study 
of  which  one  acquires  a knowledge  of  the  past,  of  the  present 
and  of  the  future. 


CHAPTER  XL VII. 

Mayura  Chitraka  or  Motely  Miscellany. 

1*  I have  stated  the  effects  of  a number  of  stellar,  atmos- 
pheric and  terrestrial  phenomena,  and  of  the  motions,  conjunc- 
tions, courses  and  the  like  of  the  planets  to  some  extent. 

2*  An  attempt  at  recapitulation  of  the  above  will  be 
deemed  a fault  in  Varaha  Mihira,  who  is  so  well  known  for 


CH.  47.] 


BRIHAT  8AMHITA. 


203 


his  brevity  in  composition.  It  is  no  doubt  improper  to  restate 
what  has  been  once  stated^  but  Jyoutishakas  will  not  deem  it 
a fault  on  the  present  occasion.  For  it  is  a well  known  fact 
that  every  work  on  Samhita  must  have  a chapter  of  this  na- 
ture, technically  known  as  Mayura  Chitraka. 

3.  Mayura  Chitraka-  is  a repetition  of  what  has  been 
once  said.  If  I should  omit  this  Chapter,  even  then,  I should 
be  open  to  the  fault  of  an  omission  of  what  ought  to  find  a 

place  in  a work  on  Samhita. 

% 

4.  If  the  five  planets  should  be  of  brilliant  appearance 
and  should  pass  through  the  northern  path,  there  would  be 
prosperity  and  plenty  in  the  land ; if  they  should  be  of  dim 
appearance  and  pass  through  the  southern  path,  there  would 
be  famine  and  deaths  in  the  land  and  mankind  would  suffer 
from  robbers. 

5.  If  Venus  should  pass  through  the  asterism  of  Magha 
while  Jupiter  passes  through  that  of  Pushya,  rulers  would 
cease  to  be  hostile  to  one  another,  and  would  become  happy 
and  the  people  would  be  freed  from  diseases  and  would  become 
happy. 

6.  If  the  moon  and  the  five  planets  should  oppress*  any 
of  the  asterisms  of  Krittika,  Magha,  Rohini,  Sravana  and 
Jyestha,  iniquity  would  prevail  in  the  western  countriesf* 

7.  If  in  the  evening,  the  planets  should  appear  of  the 
shape  of  a flagstaff  in  the  eastern  sky,  the  eastern  rulers  would 
be  at  war  with  one  another  ; if  the  planets  should  be  seen  of 
the  same  shape  but  of  disagreeable  appearance  and  in  mid- 
heaven, the  people  of  Madhyadesa  would  suffer  miseries.  But 


* Oppress  : This  means  cutting  through,  retrograde  motion,  conjunctions  and 
the  like. 

t Western  countries  : also  there  would  be  famine,  the  crops  would  fail  and 
rivers  would  become  dry. 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


204 


[CH.  47, 


if  the  appearance  should  be  agreeable,  there  would  be  no 
suffering. 

8.  If  the  planets  should  so  appear  in  the  southern  sky, 
there  would  be  drought  in  the  southern  countries  ; and  if  the 
planets  should  appear  of  small  ugly  discs,  the  rulers  would  be 
at  war  with  one  another  ; but  if  the  discs  should  be  large  and 
bright,  there  would  be  prosperity  in  the  land. 

9.  If  the  planets  should  be  seen  of  bright  appearance  in 
the  northern  sky,  the  northern  rulers  will  be  freed  from  evils  ; 
but  if  the  discs  of  the  planets  should  be  small  and  of  ashy 
color,  the  rulers  would  suffer  with  their  countries. 


10.  If  the  constellations,  the  stars  and  the  planets,  should 
appear  to  smoke,  to  burn  or  to  be  covered  with  sparks  of  fire, 
or  to  lose  their  light  for  no  apparent  cause,  the  rulers  and  the 
world  would  perish. 

11.  If  two  moons  should  be  seen  in  the  sky,  the  Brah- 
mins would  prosper  ; if  two  Suns  should  be  seen,  the  Kshatri- 
yas  would  be  at  war  ; if  three  or  four  Suns  should  be  seen  in 
the  sky,  the  world  would  come  to  an  end* 

12.  If  a comet  should  be  seen  to  pass  through  or  be  in 
contact  with  the  constellation  of  Ursa  Major  (the  Saptarishis) 
the  Abhijit,  the  Pole  star  and  the  constellation  of  Jyeshta,  the 
clouds  would  be  destroyed  ; there  would  be  good  deeds  in  the 
land,  and  men  would  suffer  from  grief.  If  the  comet  should 
appear  in  contact  with  Aslesha,  there  would  be  drought  in  the 
land  ; and  the  people  with  hungry  children  would  quit  their 
countries  and  travelling  to  foreign  lands  would  there  perish. 
This  is  certain. 


13*  When  Saturn  is  seen  to  retrograde  through  any  of 
the  seven  asterisms  from  Krittika,  there  will  be  famine  in  the 
land  and  mankind  will  suffer  from  great  fears  ; friends  will 
become  hostile  to  one  another,  and  there  will  also  be  drought 
in  the  land. 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA* 


205 


CH.  47.] 


14.  When  the  course  of  Saturn  or  of  Mars  or  of  a comet 
should  lie  through  the  circle  (Sakata)  of  the  constellation  of 
Rohini,  the  whole  world  would  sink  in  a deep  sea  of  misery 
and  perish ; and  how  can  I adequately  describe  the  condition 
of  sujBPering  humanity  then  I 


15.  If  a comet  should  continue  visible  for  a long  time,  or 
if  it  should  pass  through  all  the  constellations,  all  the  creatures 
together  with  all  the  moveable  and  immoveable  objects  would 
suffer  miseries  in  accordance  with  their  previous  karma. 


16.  If  the  moon;  should  appear  like  a bow,  be  of  dis- 
agreeable aspect  and  of  blood  color,  mankind  would  suffer 
from  hunger.  People  living  in  the  direction  of  the  bow  string 
would  become  powerful  and  successful  in  fight.  If  the  moon^s 
horn  should  point  downwards,  cows  and  crops  would  suffer;  if 
it  should  appear  to  blaze  or  smoke,  rulers  would  perish* 


17*  If  the  moon  should  appear  bright,  glossy  and  of 
large  disc,  and  if  both  her  horns  should  be  alike,  broad  and 
elevated,  and  if  the  course  of  the  moon  should  lie  through  the 
north  of  the  Naga  Veedhi  and  if  she  should  be  within  sight  of 
benefic  planets  and  free  from  the  influence  of  malefic  ones, 
mankind  would  be  happy. 


18.  If  the  course  of  the  moon  should  lie  to  the  south  of 
the  asterism  of  Magha,  Anuradha,  Jyeshtha,  Visakha  or  Chitra, 
there  would  be  misery  in  the  land;  but  if  her  course  should 
lie  through  the  middle  or  to  the  north  of  the  same  asterisms, 
there  would  be  prosperity  in  the  land. 


19*  The  line  of  clouds  across  the  Sun’s  disc  at  rising  or 
setting  is  known  as  Parigha ; Paridhi  is  also  known  as  Prati* 
surya  or  parhelion,  and  Danda  is  an  appearance  of  the  shape  of 
a straight  rainbow. 


206 


brihat  samhita. 


[CH.  47. 


20.  The  long"  rays  of  the  rising  or  setting  Sun  are  known 
as  Amogha  rays  and  Iravata  is  an  appearance  resembling  a long 
straight  broken  rainbow* 

21.  vSandhya  is  the  period  of  time  when  the  stars  con- 
tinue invisible  both  before  sun-rise  and  after  sun-set* 

22.  If  the  appearances  of  Parigha  and  the  like  should 
be  seen  during  the  period  of  Sandhya  (twilight),  there  would 

t 

be  prosperity  in  the  land,  and  if  the  appearances  should  be 
glossy,  there  would  be  immediate  rain;  and  if  of  disagreeable 
appearance,  there  would  be  wars  and  the  like  in  the  land* 

23*  If  the  appearance  known  as  Parigha  should  be  per- 
fect and  unbroken,  if  the  sky  should  be  clear,  the  solar  rays 
blue  and  glossy,  the  rainbow  white,  and  if  lightning  should  be 
seen  in  the  north-eastern  sky,  and  if  the  appearance  known  as 
Abhravriksha  (cloud-tree)  should  be  glossy  and  covered  by  the 
rays  of  the  Sun,  and  if  the  evening  Sun  should  be  hid  by 
clouds,  there  would  be  immediate  rain. 

24*  There  would  be  anarchy  in  that  country  in  which 
the  Sun  should  appear  broken  or  of  irregular  shape,  or  black 
or  small,  or  with  spots  of  the  shape  of  the  crow  and  of  dis- 
agreeable aspect* 

25*  If  a swarm  of  carnivorous  birds  should  follow  an 
army  marching  out  for  fight,  such  army  would  suffer  defeat  in 
battle,  but  if  the  birds  should  fly  before  the  army,  there  would 
be  success  in  battle* 

26.  If  at  the  hour  of  sun-rise  or  sun-set  the  army  resem- 
bling cloud  castles  should  hide  the  solar  disc,  the  king  would 
be  entangled  in  a fearful  war. 

27.  If  birds  and  animals  should  cry  aloud  in  the  direc- 
tion opposite  to  the  sun,  and  if  the  twilight  sky  should  be  of 
bright  appearance  and  rendered  agreeable  by  gentle  winds> 


CH.  47.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


207 


there  would  be  prosperity  in  the  land.  If  on  the  other  hand, 
such  twilight  sky  should  be  covered  with  dust  or  of  the  color 
of  the  blood  or  of  disagreeable  appearance,  the  country  would 
suffer  miseries. 

28.  Of  the  many  truths  stated  by  Rishis  in  their  Chapter 
entitled  Mayura  Chittraka,  I have  rejected  those  which  were 
mere  repetitions  and  stated  the  rest*  Even  after  hearing  the 
musical  note  of  the  cuckoo  the  crow  is  not  mute  ; and  when 
it  caws,  it  is  not  with  a view  to  imitate  or  excel  the  cuckoo. 

Note — It  may  be  well  to  add  here  certain  notes  relating 
to  the  phenomena  of  nature  culled  from  other  Sastras. 

r 

• f 

There  will  be  famine  as  long  as  the  course  of  Jupiter  and 
that  of  Saturn  lie  through  the  end  of  Aries  and  Scorpio  and 
the  middle  of  Taurus  and  Leo. 

During  the  period  when  Jupiter  and  Saturn  occupy  a 
single  sign  of  the  Zodic,  there  would  be  pestilence,  cholera  and 
deaths  among  the  people* 

As  long  as  Jupiter  and  Venus  continue  together  in  a state 
of  disappearance,  mankind  will  suffer  from  devils,  diseases, 
thieves  and  enemies. 

If  the  course  of  Saturn  or  the  retrogade  motion  of  Mars 
should  lie  through  the  signs  of  Sagittarius,  Aries,  Taurus, 
Pisces  or  Leo,  there  would  be  such  deaths  among  men  and 
animals  that  only  a third  of  mankind,  of  elephants,  horses, 
cows  and  other  animals,  of  birds  and  of  the  creatures  of  water 
would  survive* 

If  the  motion  of  Mars  should  be  an  accelerated  one,  there 
would  be  fear  from  destructive  fires  ; if  he  should  retrograde 
and  enter  another  sign,  the  people  would  suffer  from  heat  and 
many  families  would  suffer,  and  if  his  course  should  lie  through 


208  BEIHAT  SAMHITA-  [CH-  47* 

a sign  longer  than  the  calcnlated  period,  there  would  be 
drought  in  the  land  and  rulers  will  be  at  war. 

If  Jupiter  should  retrograde  or  if  his  motion  should 
be  an  accelerated  one,  and  if  in  this  state  he  should  enter 
another  sign,  the  rivers  would  not  be  full  ; the  kings  would 
lose  their  glory  and  suffer  from  diseases. 

If  Saturn  should,  after  a long  direct  course,  begin  to  re- 
trograde or  have  an  accelerated  motion,  and  in  this  state  enter 
another  sign,  there  would  be  diseases,  famine  and  drought  in 
the  land  and  vehicles  will  suffer  destruction. 

If,  when  Jupiter  should  enter  another  sign  when  in  his  ac- 
celerated motion,  Saturn  should  be  in  his  slow  motion,  Venus 
should  have  disappeared  and  Mercury  should  have  reappear- 
ed, the  country  would  perish. 

If  Saturn,  Mars  and  Jupiter  should  be  within  sight  of  each 
other,  men  with  their  children  would  suffer  from  hunger  and 
from  weapons. 

If,  while  the  course  of  the  sun  lies  through  the  end  of  the 
signs  Taurus,  Geminii,  Scorpio  and  Leo,  Jupiter  and  Mars 
should  be  in  conjunction  with  it,  mankind  would  suffer  from 
famine,  and  the  deaths  would  be  so  many  that  in  the  crema- 
tion grounds  of  villages  and  towns,  Pisachas  might  be  seen 
with  hundreds  of  dead  bodies  in  their  mouths. 

If  two  or  three  or  four  planets  should  meet  together, 
people  would  suffer  from  deaths  and  famine.  If  five  planets 
should  meet,  there  would  also  be  famine  ; if  six,  the  chief  ruler 
would  run  away  from  his  kingdom,  and  if  seven,  humanity 
would  come  to  an  end. 

If  the  course  of  Mars  and  Saturn,  through  the  signs  of 
Cancer,  Leo  and  Pisces  should  be  retrograde  or  re-retrograde, 
there  would  be  much  suffering  on  Earth.  There  would  also  be 
a scarcity  of  water  and  wars  in  the  land  ; grains  would  be  des- 
troyed and  mankind  would  suffer  from  robbers. 


CH.  47.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


209 


If  Saturn  and  Rahu  should  meet,,  crops  would  be  injured ; 
commodity  would  become  scarce ; husbands  and  wives  would 
be  at  strife^  there  would  be  drought  and  famine  in  the  land  j 
cows  would  suffer  death  and  men  would  become  exceedingly 
lazy. 


If  the  course  of  the  sun  and  moon,  both  of  brilliant  discs, 
should  lie  through  the  seven  asterisms  from  Krittika,  Madhya- 
desa  would  suffer  miseries. 

If  the  course  of  the  Sun,  the  Moon,  Mars  and  Venus 
should  lie  through  the  seven  asterisms  from  Magha,  there 
would  be  grief  and  disease  among  men,  and  the  god  of  death 
would  be  busy  in  his  wjde  work  of  destruction  in  the  southern 
countries.  ’ • 

If  the  course  of  Jupiter,  the  Moon  and  Mercury,  all  of 
brilliant  discs,  should  lie  through  the  seven  asterisms  from 
Anuradha,  the  western  countries,  as  far  as  the  sea,  as  well  as 
the  western  sea  itself  with  its  creatures,  would  suffer  miseries* 

If  the  course  of  the  Sun,  Venus  and  Mars  should  lie 
through  the  seven  asterisms  from  Sravishta,  the  northern 
countries  would  suffer  miseries.  If  the  benefic  planets  should 
appear  of  the  color  of  gold,  the  Brahmins,  the  Kshatriyas,  the 
Vysiyas  and  the  Sudras  would  all  attend  to  their  respective 
duties  and  would  become  happy. 


This  brings  us  to  the  end  of  Samhita  Proper  or  the  first 
half  of  Samhita.  In  this  part  over  one  thousand  phenomena 
of  Nature  have  been  treated,  each  of  which  must  have  taken 
the  ancient  Hindus  years  of  observation  and  tabulation.  As 
these  affect  the  well-being  of  humanity,  a study  of  the  same 
must  be  calculated  to  add  to  human  happiness  j most  of  the 
phenomena  might  appear  improbable  of  occurrence,  but  it 

would  be  wrong,  judging  from  our  limited  experience  of  Na- 

27 


210 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA, 


[CH.  47. 


ture^s  ways  to  say  that  she  will  never  be  caught  playing  this 
trick  or  that,  or  guilty  of  this  freak  or  that.  The  solar  spots  is 
now  an  admitted  fact.  This  was  soon  followed  by  a green  sun» 
The  mysterious  noise  heard  recently  in  parts  of  Southern  India 
is  another  instance  of  the  kind.  A few  years  ago  it  was  report- 
ed in  certain  newspapers  that  in  the  District  of  Cornwall, 
England,  there  occurred  a shower  of  flesh — vast  fields  being 
found  literally  covered  with  flesh  several  inches  deep.  More 
instances  of  the  kind  may  be  quoted.  Indeed  mysterious  are 
the  ways  of  Nature,  and  there  is  no  saying  what  she  may  or 
she  may  not  be  capable  of.  The  present  volume  therefore 
becomes  exceedingly  interesting,  as  it  embodies  in  a small 
compass  a vast  body  of  useful  and  curious  information  regard- 
ing the  phenomena  of  Nature  together  with  their  effects  and 
the  means  for  removing  the  evils  thereof* 

The  second  part  would  be  more  interesting  to  the  general 
public.  A variety  of  interesting  subjects  are  treated  of  in 
it.  It  would  be  well  to  state  here  briefly  a few  of  such 
subjects : — 

The  Chapter  on  Pushyasnana  treats  of  a particular  bath 
for  the  king*  This  might  as  well  be  used  by  any-body  else — 
the  ingredients  to  be  put  into  water  containing  evidently 
certain  magnetic  properties. 

The  Chapter  on  the  Royal  Sword  contains  certain  methods 
for  tempering  cutting  instruments. 

The  Chapter  on  Anga  Vidya  relates  to  the  interpretation 
of  accidental  gestures,  movements,  utterances  and  the  like  of 
man  especially.  It  rests  on  the  basis  that  an  all-pervading 
universal  Intelligence  speaks  in  a thousand  ways,  and  that  it  is 
for  man  to  interpret  such  language  and  benefit  himself  by  it. 
Scoffers  will  be  least  benefited  by  this  chapter.  Earnest  en- 
quirers after  truth,  by  studying  this  branch  of  the  science 
will  be  enabled  to  make  pretty  correct  predictions. 


CH.  47.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


211 


The  Chapter  on  Under-Currents  is  also  an  interesting  one* 
The  author  proposes  to  discover  the  position,  depth  and  course 
of  under-currents  from  the  appearance  of  the  ground  above. 
The  subject  requires  investigation.  If  there  should  be  truth 
in  the  author’s  statements,  many  of  the  tube-wells  and  boring 
instruments  may  be  very  well  dispensed  with. 

Equally  interesting'  is  the  chapter  relating  to  the  plan- 
tation and  growth  of  trees.  According  to  the  author,  all  seed 
trees  can  be  made  to  grow  like  creepers  by  preparing  the  seeds 
in  a particular  way. 

The  subject  of  house  building,  and  with  it  that  of  the  pre- 
paration of  strong  cements,  known  as  Vajralepana  are  also 
treated.  f 

The  author  then  treats  of  the  features  and  other  qualities 
of  superior  elephants,  horses,  dogs  and  the  like*  In  this 
connection  the  subject  of-Samudrika,  which  relates  to  the  de- 
termination of  the  fortunes  of  man  from  the  marks  and  lines 
of  his  body  and  of  which  palmistry  is  a branch,  is  also  treated* 

The  subject  of  the  kind  treatment  of  women  is  then 
taken  up.  Rules  are  also  laid  down  for  the  preparation  of 
scents  and  perfumes.  A few  lines  are  devoted  to  the  subject  of 
sexual  love  and  of  beds  and  cots* 

The  author  then  examines  the  qualities  of  superior  dia- 
monds, rubies,  pearls  and  the  like. 

The  subject  of  omens  and  prognostications  is  also  treated* 

The  above  is  by  no  means  an  exhaustive  list*  While  Part  I 
is  instructive  Fart  II  is  interesting. 


End  op  Part  I. 


• •'  . . V 


I 


! rr, 


./.nil HA?.  'i'AV.tV.' 


.^•.C'4'  .i;:/ 


I . f'  t \ 

I 

. : i I ' [ - 


I : 


, I 


I ,,t  I5’,t  I .1^  . I i 1 I I ' }l'-*  • 


> iH:. 

' i'  l!  ^ 


n > ^ "J 

I - ’ . ' ’ I 

• ( .'•  >>?  , I 

: , . : ■ M ‘ 

’?••  ''I’n  '■■ 


I i 1> 

CmMI  't'i 


<«■  , . 


''  /I  {'i  ^ ‘ : M 


' . , ' 1 ^ • I 


.»  1 ■ 


i ni! 


\ 


*.•*“  • ..:1 

• •>: 


t 

■ r . 


,*H<'  1 n ■ • j-  ’ , < ' , ■ r 


, >••  I 


i.  - 


U 


IV' 


<:  ! ; ,« ;n  1.' 


' r'V*!  •) 

• V' 


7/- 


j 


I r ’ 


I,  r n ? 


1 •'  ■ J 


- iiM*' 

I , . I ■ >*i' . I • I 

; I 'JfrI  7v  . ' I f * ' i ' ' vj 

, . ; ' ■ ■ '•(  t n: . t?  • 

, o,  'f  ft 


I '»/■ 

■ » . f , . 


■ . ‘ } r-  M • *'.  nil 


;;  rr.!'  0 


■If!  1 1'.f  i;  ■■  7 i 


■ ; , .:!  I 

! I i '.  tiii 


■ ‘1 1 i 


'“•j|1i.  ni 


'i*>.  'foijr.'rt!  < i'’'  Tii 


i 


I uno^  n 

'■  -fi., '.J 1 


I « 


>4  I , 


■'I'”'  ' 


■ ' ' *• 


0 n 


V,  lUif 


Iff'  -pi 


-;,t  ) 'aw  ! ‘ ;il  > ■ 

, 1 .1  ■•up  "'1 ' ' 

■'•'■  .1 . 1 . ^ ' 

1 

i 

{: 

• 

\ 

1 • i ii *■<  '"ij  '■  1 . 1 r (j 

* 

1 r ' • : 

••„■  -i  ..  .»('  ' r,'':  ■•■.•'IT 

" 

iV-i  '/  ’ « ' 

■ 1 

( • 

1 

* . • ^ i 

1 1 

* • i 

f > 

' \ 1 

1 ’ 

' *>  ' 7'V  '-JJ.' 

i ' 1 

. 1 

» 

1 

, . i 'Hi 

■f  v (i  41‘i 

RYAN 


ISCELLANY. 


THE 

BRIHAT  SAMHl  TA 

OF 

Varaha  Mihira, 

TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH 


N.  Chidambaram  Iyer,  b.  a.,  p.  t.  s. 

FOUNDEK. 

OF  THE 

Tiruvadt  Jotistantra  Sabha. 

I^  AKT  II. 


[Registered  Copyright,! 


Illabras: 

rKlKTIilD  AT  THE  fOSTB.K  PRESS,  23,  EliNDALL’s  ROAD,  YEPEBt 

1885. 


i • : ■: 

\ 


i 

4Cm  • ^ 'a  *.  f*  I 


4 r > 


<-■  / . 


^ii:. 


' y 

■4  f ^ 


.vr.'-iii.z,  i' 


\ 


A i.I  / , J:K  t ,.  t.  JV:I.  i 1 1 ii 


> i 


.i  f M‘V 


i 


% 


\ 


\ 


s 


i> 


} 


*%  vVi’  ^- 


% 

> '> 


# 


r. 

*.  1. 


. w 


;4ii^ 


Till;: 

BRIHAT  SAMIHTA 

OF 

VARAHA  MIHIRA. 

o 

PAKT  II. 

CILAPTER  T.  (48) 

VvsRYA.  Snana  or  Royal  Bath. 

].  The  king  forps  tlie  root  of  tlie  tree  of  Society. 
As  the  Society  prospers  or  suffers  nccording  as  the  king 
is  in  a healthy  or  unhealthy  condition  of  mind  or  body, 
he  becomes  an  import'a;nt  subject  for  consideration. 

2.  That  ceremony  of  purification  dictated  by  Brahma 
to  Brahaspati  for  the  benefit  of  Indra  and  leariiing  which 
Vridha  Garga  taught  to  Bhagura,  bear  now  from  mo. 

o O' 

3.  The  priest  and  the  astrologer  shall  advise  and 
hel[)  the  king*  to  have  the  bath  known  as  Pushya  Snana. 
There  is  no  bath  as  effective  as  this  in  freeing  the  king 
from  all  evils. 

4.  The  sire  for  the  bath  shall  be  fine  from  the  trees 
Sleshmataka''’ and  Aksha,f  and  from  thorny  trees  and  trees 
of  pungent  and  bitter  fiavor  as  well  as  trees  of  bad  odour; 
and  the  place  shall  also  be  free  from  owls,  vultures  and  the 
like  birds. 

5.  It  may  be  a beautiful  forest  fuT  of  luxuriant 
trees,  shrubs?  creepers,  thin  tendrils,  thick  foliage,  and 
of  tender  leaves. 

G-  Or  it  may  be  some  pure  building  near  a forest 
j-eudered  beautil'nl  by  the  presence  of  the  cock,  the  pheasant, 
the  parrot,  the  peacock,  the  woodpecker,  the  king-fisher, 
the  haritala  pigeons,  the  kiikava  (a  kind  of  partridge),  tho 


* I’lie  tree  Corrlia  mixa,  known  in  Tamil  as  (s^ojeS, 
t Eleocarpns  Ganitrus,  known  in  Tamil  as  ^rreSssirdj  icath. 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA- 


O 


[Cfl.  1. 


cuckoo,  the  francoline  partridge,  the  ckataka,  the  manjula^ 
the  turtle  dove  and  the  like  ; 

7.  And  by  bees  intoxicated  by  sucking  the  honey 
from  flowers,  and  by  the  cuckoo  and  the  like  ; 

8.  Or  it  mav  be  the  beautiful  and  afrre cable  beds 

•>  CD 

of  rivers  with  lines  made  by  birds  at  play  5 

9.  Or  it  may  be  by  the  side  of  a tank  with  the 
blue  lotus  for  its  eyes,  the  jumping  swan  for  its  um- 
brella, and  with  the  music  of  the  duck,  the  ospre}^,  and 
the  crane,  thus  resembling  Indra. 

10.  Or  it  may  be  by  the  side  of  a tank  of  lotus  whose 
stem  resembles  a girl  with  the  full  blown  flower  for 
her  eyes,  the  music  of  the  swan  for  her  voice,  and  the 
big  buds  for  her  bosom. 

11.  Or  it  may  be  a cow  pen  rendered  agreeable  by 
the  falling  foam  from  the  mouth  of  the  cows,  by  their 
dung,  their  foot-prints,  and  by  the  skipping  of  the  new 
bo  in  calf. 

12.  Or  it  may  be  some  spot  on  the  sea  beach  near  a 
harbour  full  of  tall  ships,  that  have  made  successful  voyages 
and  rendered  pleasant  by  birds  living  in  the  hijjal  trees. 

13.  Or  it  may  be  the  sacred  hermitage  of  some 
Rishis  in  which  the  lion  is  not  feared  by  the  doe,  and  in 
which  a promise  of  protection  is  given  to  helpless'  birds 
and  to  the  young  deer. 

14.  Or  it  may  be  some  human  dwelling  rendered  happy 
by  the  presence  of  a beautiful  young  woman  whose  gait 
is  impeded  by  the  weight  of  her  girdle,  her  anklet  and  her 
heavy  hips,  whose  eyes  are  soft  as  those  of  the  deer,  and 
whose  voice  is  sweet  as  the  musical  note  of  the  cuckoo- 

15.  Or  it  may  be  some  pure  and  holy  place  of  worship 
ou  the  banks  of  sacred  rivers  or  flower  gardens,  or  some 
])eauti£ul  ground  or  the  banks  of  rivers  flowing  from  west  to 
east  or  from  south  to  north,  or  some  spot  where  the  river 
moves  in  a curve  from  left  to  right. 


CH.  ].J 


brihat  samhita. 


]0.  It  must  be  a spot  free  from  asb,  cliarcoal,  bones, 
saline  soil,  hair,  ditcb^  crab  boles,  bog  boles,  rat  boles  and 
anb  bills. 

17.  The  site  may  be  firm,  of  good  scent,  of  agreeable 
appearance  and  of  sweet  soil  and  even,  or  the  ground  may 
be  one  wbicb  at  one  time  was  occupied  by  an  army,  if  such 
ground  were  of  the  description  given  above.  If  the  king 
performs  bis  Pusbya  Snana  in  any  of  these  places  he  will 
triumph  in  war. 

18.  ddie  Jj^outisbaka,  the  minister  and  the  priest 

shall  leave  the  town  by  night  and  march  towards  the  north 
or  north-east.  t- 

19.  There  the  pnest  shall  perform  pooja  to  the  Devas 
with  fried  grain,  colored  rice,  curdled  milk  and  flowers ; the 
mantras  for  the  invocation  of  the  Devas  have  also  been 
stated  by  the  Pishis  : 

20.  I invite  the  presence  here  of  all  the  Devas  whom 
this  pooja  might  please  and  in  whose  honor  this  pooja  is 
performed — the  Dik  Devas,  the  Naga  Devas  and  the  Brah- 
man a Devas. 

21.  On  inviting  the  Devas  as  prescribed  above,  the 
priest  shall  address  them  as  follows  : you  shall  all  receive 
pooja  again  to-morrow,  and  after  blessing  the  king  may 
depart. 

22.  After  offering  pooja  to  the  Devas  invited,  the 
party  shall  spend  the  night  at  the  spot,  and  the  interpre- 
tation of  the  good  or  bad  dreams  that  may  be  dreamt  is 
given  in  my  work  on  Yoga  Yatra. 

2n.  The  party  shall  rise  earl}’’  next  morning,  and  pro- 
ceeding to  the  forest  shall  procure  the  several  articles  re- 
fjuired  for  Pushya  Snana,  and  there  are  slokas  of  PiKshis  on 
this  point : 

24.  On  the  ground  intended  fui‘  the  bath,  the  priest 


BRIHAT  SAMHTTA. 


4. 


[CIT.  1. 


shall  draw  a circle^  cover  it  with  gems  and  mark  in  it 
places  for  the  several  Devas. 

25  The  priest  shall  then  represent  in  the  circle  tlie 
figures  of  the  Nagas^  the  Ynkslias,  the  Devas^  the  Pitris, 
the  Gandharvas^  the  Upsarasas,  the  Itishis  and  the  Siddhas. 

26.  He  sliall  also  represent  the  figures  of  the  planets, 
the  constellations,  the  Eudras,  the  Saptamatas  (seven 
mothers;,  Subbramania,  Yishnn,  Visakhas,  the  Lokapalas 
and  the  wives  of  the  Devas. 

27.  The  figures  shall  be  made  of  various  agreeable 
and  scented  colors,  and  the  priest  shall  perform  pooja  to 
them  as  prescribed  in  the  Sastras  with  sandal  pjaste, 
wreathes  of  flowers  and  the  like. 

28.  He  shall  satisfy  tlie  Devas  by  the  offer  of  sweet- 
meats, various  preparations  of  rice,  fruits,  roots,  meat, 
sweet  and  agreeable  drinks,  liquor,  milk  and  alcohol. 

29.  I shall  now  proceed  to  state  the  Pooja  rules  con- 
tained in  the  Sastras  ; as  regards  Pooja  to  the  planets  the 
rules  of  Graha  Yagnam  should  be  followed. 

SO.  The  Pisachas,  the  Asuras  and  the  Rakshasas  shall 
he  gratified  by  the  offer  of  meat,  rice,  toddy  and  the  like. 
The  Pit  ris  shall  be  gratified  by  the  pouring  out  of  oil  over 
tlie  figures  representing  them,  by  eye  salve,  and  by  the 
offer  of  gingelly,  meat,  rice  and  the  like. 

31.  The  Rishis  shall  be  honored  by  the  recitation  of 
the  Sarna  mantras,  Yajur  mantras,  Pik  mantras,  and  with 
sandal  paste,  scented  smoke  and  flower  wreathes.  The  Naga 
Devas  shall  be  honored  by  the  recitation  of  the  Asleshaka 
Yarnas,  and  by  the  offer  of  sugar,  honey  and  ghee. 

32.  The  Devas  shall  be  satisfied  bv  the  offer  of  scent- 
ed  smoke,  ahutis  of  ghee,  flower  wreathes,  gems,  praises 
and  prostration.  The  Gandharvas  and  Upsarasas  shall  be 
gratified  by  the  offer  of  sandal  paste,  flower  wreathes  and 
scented  smoke. 


CH.  ].] 


BlilHAT  SAMHITA. 


i) 

o3.  'Fhe  otlior  Dcvas  sliali  be  gi-atiiied  by  the  otlbr  of 
various  kituls  of  food,  eaten  by  all  castes  of  men.  All  the 
Devas  shall  be  adorned  with  cord  amulets,  banners,  oriia- 
ineuts  and  sacred  threads. 

31'.  The  priest  shall  then  form  a fire  on  the  western 
or  southern  side  of  the  circle  ou  ground  ])iepared  for  the 
pui-pose,  and  shall  procure  a quantity  of  the  long  Kusa  grass 
containiug  no  inner  blades  and  other  requisites  for  the  fire 
ceremonies. 

35.  He  shall  procure  fried  grain,  oil,  colored  rice, 
curdled  milk,  lioney,  mtistard  seed,  sandal  paste,  flowers, 
scented  smoke,  3'ellov^  pigunent  (Gorochana),  collyrium, 
gingelly  seed,  and  the  several  swoet  fruits  of  the  season. 

36.  He  shall  also  ])rocure  ghee  and  rice  cooked  in 
milk, — all  in  earthen  plates,  and  with  all  the  above  shall 
perform  pooja  ou  the  western  side  of  the  Yedi  (prepared 
ground)  which  Vedi  shall  also  be  used  for  the  bath. 

37.  Ou  the  four  corners  of  the  Yedi,  shall  be  placed 
strong  pots  with  white  threads  tied  round  their  neck  and 
with  their  months  covered  wdth  leaves  of  milky  trees  and 
fruits. 

3S.  There  shall  be  placed  pots  filled  with  water  for 
Puslpya  Snana,  into  which  shall  be  thrown  gems  and  the 
several  substances  for  the  bath.  Garga  has  given  a list  of 
the  substances  required  for  the  purpose. 

39.  I’he  seeds  or  roots  to  be  thrown  into  the  pots  aro 
Jyotishmati,* * * §  Trayamana,t  Abhaya,J  .Aparajita,§  Jeeva,|| 
Yisveswari,  Patha,*^  Samanga,  Yi  jay  a.  ft 

* Jyotishmati,  Trigonella  foeuutn  Grgecum,  known  in  Tamilas 

f Being  already  explained. 

X Abhaya,  Plant  Terminalia  scritrina.  •sQ^^inb. 

§ Aparajita,  Plant  Clitoria  teruatea. 

II  Jeeva,  probably  Jeevanta,  kind  of  pot  herb'. 

*[[  Patha  : a climbing  plant  possessing  various  medicinal  properties. 

Chypea  Hernandifolia,  u:BsuuiTt'ctr  or 
ft  Vijaya  ; Orris  root. 


G 


KPJUAT  SAMIJITA.  [CH.  1. 

40.  Salia/^  Sabadevi^f  Poornakosa,;!;  Satavari,§  Arish- 
iikn,\\  Siva,^  Bhadra.§§ 

4].  Brabmi,*^  Ksbema^tt  seeds  as 

well  as  gold  and  all  plants  and  juices  of  good  properties. 

42.  He  shall  also  put  into  the  pots  gems,  various 
fragrant  substances,  the  leaves  of  Vilva,  and  the  root  of 
long  pepper  and  creepers  bearing  good  names,  as  well  as 
silver  and  other  good  substances. 

43.  This  over,  the  skin  of  a full  grown  fine  bull  shall 
be  spread  on  the  ground  with  the  head  towards  the  east, 

4T  Over  it  shall  bespread  the  skin  of  the  Yodha, 
over  it  again,  the  skin  of  the  lion,  and  over  it  the  skin  of 
the  tiger. 

45.  On  spreading  these  skins  one  over  the  other  on 
the  Vedi  in  an  auspicious  hour  while  the  moon  is  in  the 
asterism  of  Pushya,  the  king’s  throne  (seat)  made  purely  of 
gold  or  silver  or  copper,  or  of  the  wood  of  milky  trees,  shall 
be  placed  over  the  skins. 

47.  The  height  of  the  seat  may  be  either  a cubit  or  a 
cubit  and  a quarter  or  a cubit  and  a half  ,*  if  the  seat  be 
of  the  height  mentioned  above,  the  king  will  triumph  over 
his  enemies,  will  be  the  ruler  of  vast  tracts  of  land,  and  will 
be  happy  and  prosperous. 

48.  Gold  shall  be  placed  in  the  middle  of  the  seat  and 
the  king  shall  sit  over  it  wTth  a happy  and  peaceful  mind 
surrounded  by  ministers,  friends,  priests,  astronornej’S,  aged 
citizens,  and  persons  bearing  agreeable  names. 

^ Saha  : the  Alee  plant, 

ft§  Already  explained. 

11  Arishtika  : The  Soap  berry  tree. 

Siva  : Cicca  disticha. 

§§  Bhadra  : a fragrant  grass,  Cy perns  rotnndus. 

Brahmi  ; plant  Elerodeudrum  siphonanthus  ; Qas-visr^&'s-ir'sv^^ 

tt  Kshenra  : a kind  of  perfume. 

It  Aja  : a plant  whose  bnlb  resembles  the  adder  of  a goal. 


cn.  1 .] 


BRIIIAT  SAMHITA. 


7 


49.  The  heralds  sliall  sing  aloud  the  pi’aiscs  of  the 
king  and  tlie  Brahmins  shall  charit  hjunus  from  the  Vedas, 
and  witli  these  shall  be  sounded  the  drum  and  the  conch 
shell  d rising  away  all  evils  from  the  king. 

50.  The  king  shall  be  dressed  in  now  white  silk 
clotlies,  and  tdie  priest  shall  spread  over  him  a woollen 
shawl,  and  pour  over  him.  several  pots  of  ghee  after  dedicat- 
ii]g  the  same  to  the  Devas. 

51.  The  number  of  the  ghee  vessels  shall  be  eight,  twenty- 
eight  or  one  hundred  and  eight.  If  this  number  is  in- 
creased, there  will  be  an  increase  of  prosperity.  There  are 
mantras  for  the  ghee  bath  stated  by  Rishis. 

52.  Ghee  is  statedTo  be  light ; it  washes  off  sins  ; it  is 
the  food  of  the  Devas,  and  the  world  continues  to  exist 
by  it. 

53.  May  all  the  sins  committed  by  thee  in  your  incar- 
nations on  the  Earth,  in  Swarga  and  in  the  middle  region 
be  washed  off  by  contact  with  ghee. 

5 k The  priest  shall  then  remove  the  shawl  from  the 
king’s  person  and  shfdl  bathe  the  king  in  the  holy  waters 
of  Pushya  Snana,  strewn  over  wdth  fruits  and  flowers, 
chanting  the  following  mantras. 

55.  May  the  ancient  Siddah  Devas,  Brahma,  Vishnu 
and  Rudra,  the  Sadhya  Devas  and  the  Marut  Devas  bathe 
thee  in  the  hol}^  waters  of  Pushya  Snana, 

56.  May  the  twelve  Adityas  (suns),  the  eight  Vasus, 
Bie  eleven  Rudras,  the  two  Aswani  Devas  (celestial  phy- 
sicians), Aditi  (the  mother  of  the  Devas),  Swaha  (the  wdfe 
of  Agni),  Siddhi,  and  Saraswati  bathe  thee  in  the  holy  waters 

of  Push V a Snana. 

«/ 

57.  May  Keerti,  Lakshmi,  Dhriti,  Sree,  Sinivalee, 
Kuhu,  Danu  (the  mother  of  Asuras),  Surasa  (the  mother  of 


8 


B uni  AT  SAMIllTA. 


[CH.  1. 


t]ie  Kaksliasas),  Vinafca  (the  motlier  of  Garada),  Kadru  (the 
)nother  of  the  serpents),  bathe  thee  in  the  holy  waters  of 
Pushy  a Snana. 

58.  May  the  other  wives  and  mothers  of  the  Devas 
not  mentioned  above  and  all  the  Apsarasas  bathe  thee  in 
the  boly  waters  of  Pashya  Snana. 

59.  May  the  deities  presiding  over  the  Naksliatras^ 
over  the  Muhoortas,  the  Pakshas  (fortnights),  the  Aliora- 
tras  (day  and  night),  the  Sandhis  (periods  of  interval),  the 
Samvatsaras  (years),  the  Varas  (weeks),  the  Kalas;,  the 
Kashthas,  the  Kshanas  and  the  Lavas  bathe  thee  in  the 
holy  water  of  Pushy  a Snana. 

60.  May  all  the  Devas  presiding  over  various  other 
divisions  of  time,  may  the  Devas  moving  in  their  celestial 
vehicles,  may  the  Manus  and  the  Sagaras  bathe  thee  in  the 
holy  waters  of  Pushya  Snana. 

61.  May  the  Saptarishes^with  their  wives,  the  Devas 
residing  in  the  Palar  regions^  may  Maricliee,  Atri,  Pul  aha, 
Pulastya,  Ivratu  and  Angirasa, 

62.  May  Brigu,  Sanat  Kimiara,  Sanaka,  Sanandaiia, 
Sanatana,  Daksha,  Jaigishavya,  Bhagandara., 

68.  MayEkata,  Dvvita,  Trita,  Jabalee,  Kasyapa,  Dur- 
vasa  (above  control),  Kanva  and  Katyayana, 

64.  May  Markandeya  of  great  devotion,  Sunasyepa, 
Vidooratha,  Oorva,  Samvartaka,  Chyavana,  Atri  and  Para- 
sara , 

65.  Dvyapayana  (Vyasa),  Yavakroeta,  Devaraja, 
liis  younger  brother  and  other  Eishis  learned  in  the  Vedas 
and  who  act  up  to  them, 

66.  Wit!)  their  disciples  and  their  wives  bathe  thee 
in  the  holy  waters  of  Pushjm  Snana,  as  well  as  the  deities 


cn.  1.] 


BRIUAT  PAMIIITA- 


9 


presiding  over  mountains,  trees,  croepers^  sacred  places  of 
devotion  or  worship. 

67.  May  tlio  Devns  presiding  over  hirge  rivers,  the 
Xagas,  tbo  Kimpnvushas,  the  renowved  'Vyghanasas  (a  sect 
of  Vanaprastluis)  and  the  birds  ot  tlie  air, 

6S.  Mav  Prnjapati,  Diti,  the  all  useful  cows,  the  vehi- 
cles of  the  Devas  and  the  spirit  presiding  over  the  whole 
Universe  and  over  movable  and  immovable  objects, 

69.  May  also  tho  Agnis  {firesb  the  Pitri  Devas,  the 
Stars  and  the  Spirits  presiding  over  the  clouds,  the  sky,  tho 
several  directions  or  points  of  tho  compass  and  other  De- 
vas of  fame, 

70.  Batlie  tli6e. in  the  holy  waters  of  Pushya  Snana 
and  thereby  free  thee  from  all  evils  ; may  they  bless  thee 
with  long  life,  health  and  happiness. 

71.  There  shall  then  be  recited  the  Rudragana  man- 
tras, the  Kusmanda  mantras,  the  Maharoiihina  mantras, 
and  mantras  sacred  to  Kubera,  all  referred  to  in  Adharva 
Kalpa  ; 

72.  Also  the  three  mantras  beginning  with  Apohistha 
and  the  four  mantras  beginning  with  Hiranyavarna,  shall 
be  recited.  After  the  bath  the  king  shall  wear  a couple 
of  cotton  clothes. 

73.  Tlie  king  shall  then  perform  the  A chain  any  a 
ceremony  and  pooja  to  Deva,  to  his  Guru  and  to  the  Brah- 
mins, and  he  shall  pa}^  due  honors  to  his  umbrella,  to  bis 
banner  and  weapons — sweet  music  playing  all  the  while. 

71'.  Ayushyam  Varchasyam’’  and  “ Ro3'asposha”  and 
other  Riks  shall  then  bo  recited,  and  the  king  shall  then 
dress  himself  in  milltai’y  attire. 

75.  The  king  shall  then  proceed  to  the  second  Vedi 
and  take  liis  seat  on  skins  whicli  shall  bo  laid  one  over  the 

f 

other  as  follows. 


10 


ERIIfAT  SAMHJTA. 


[CH.  I. 


7G.  The  bull  skin  shall  be  laid  next  to  the  ground  ; 
over  it  shall  be  laid  the  skin  of  the  cat : over  it  ao-ain  the 

' 7 Q 

skin  of  the  Kuril  fa  kind  of  deer) ; over  it  the  skin  of  the 
spotted  antelope  ; over  it  again  the  skin  of  the  lion,  and 
over  it  the  skin  of  the  tiger. 

77.  The  priest  shall  perform  the  homa  (fire)  cere- 
mony offering  to  the  tire  dried  twigs,  gingelly  seeds,  ghee 
and  the  like,  reciting  riks  sacred  to  Rudra,  Indra,  Brahas- 
pati,  Vishnu  and  Vayu. 

78.  The  astrologer  shall  note  the  several  indications 
connected  with  the  Homa  fire  and  make  the  predictions 
as  stated  in  the  Chapter  on  Indra  Dhwaja,  and  the  priest, 
after  couipleting  what  might  remain  of  the  ceremony,  shall^ 
with  clasped  hands,  speak  out  as  follows  : 

79.  May  the  Devas  on  receiving  due  pooja  from  the 

king  bestow  blessings  on  him  and  depart. 

\ 

80.  The  king  shall  please  the  astrologer  and  the 
priest  by  the  gift  of  large  sums  of  money,  and  he  shall  also 
present  money  to  the  other  Brahmins  learned  in  the  Vedas 
according  to  their  merit. 

81.  The  king  shall  then  give  his  subjects  assurances 
of  good  government,  and  shall  release  from  jail  all  prisoners, 
excepting  those  who  may  have  been  just  then  punished  for 
offences. 

82.  If  the  Fushya  Snana  be  repeated  every  month 
when  the  Moon  passes  through  the  asterism  of  Pushja,  the 
king  will  enjoy  increase  of  w’^ealth,  health  and  fame.  If 
the  Pushya  Homa  ceremony  be  performed  when  the  Moon 
passes  through  any  other  asterism,  the  king  will  only 
enjoy  one  half  of  the  good  effects  prescribed  for  it. 

83.  On  the  occurrence  of  portents,  of  eclipses  and  of 
planetary  conjunctions,  the  kiug  shall  have  the  bath 
known  as  Pushva  Snana. 


CIT.  li.l 


BUI  HAT  SAMHITA. 


11 


81.  There  are  no  portents  wliose  evil  effects  are  irre- 
mediable by  Pushya  Siiana  and  there  are  no  ceremonies 
calculated  to  do  a king  as  much  good  as  the  ceremony  ot 
Pusliya  Homa. 

85.  The  king  that  desires  an  increase  of  power  and  the 
king  that  desires  sons  will  be  benefited  by  Pushya  Snana. 

8().  Thus  have  been  stated  by  Brahaspati  to  India 
the  rules  relating  to  tlie  ceremony  of  Pushya  Snana — for  the 
increase  of  his  family  and  of  his  wealth. 

87.  That  king  who  bathes  in  the  waters  of  Pushva 
Snana  his  elephants  aiid  horses  will  have  these  animals 
freed  from  all  evils  and  become  prosperous. 

r 

r n-  ^ 

CHAPTER  IT.  (49) 

On  Patta  or  Crown  Plate. 

1.  Able  writers  have  fully  treated  of  the  subject  of 
Patta.  I shall  here  give  a summary  of  their  statements, 
not  omitting  liowever  the  important  points. 

2.  That  it  may  do  good;  the  king's  patta  shall  be  S 
inches  broad  in  the  middle,  the  queen’s  shall  be  7 inches 
broad,  and  the  prince’s  shall  be  6 inches  broad. 

3.  The  general’s  shall  be  4 inches  broad  in  the  middle. 
The  Frasadapatta,  (which  is  worn  by  a person  as  a token 
of  royal  favor)  shall  be  2 inches  broad.  Thus  pattas  are 
five  in  number. 

4'.  If  the  patta  were  made  of  pure  gold,  and  twice  as 
long,  with  its  sides  half  as  broad  as  the  dimension  at  the 
middle,  it  would  make  the  wearer  happy. 

5.  The  king’s  patta  shall  have  five  points  or  crests  ; 
the  queen’s  and  the  prince’s  shall  have  three  crests  ; the 


* A frontlet  or  £llet  worn  round  the  head, 


12 


BRIHAT  HI TA, 


[err.  o. 


genera]’, -ts  have  a single  crest  aiul  tlie  Tretsadapatta 

shall  have  no  crest. 

6.  If  gold  plate  while  being  beaten  out  for  the  patta 
should  extend  easily,  the  king  would  enjoy  an  increase  of 
prosperity  and  success  and  his  subjects  too  would  be  happy. 

7.  If,  while  being  beaten  out,  the  plate  should  be 
AYOunded  in  the  middle,  the  king’s  life  and  power  would 
suifer  destruction.  If  it  should  break  either  at  the  middle 
or  at  the  sides,  there  would  be  miseiy  and  the  plate  should 
bo  rejected- 

8.  If,  while  the  patta  is  being  made,  evil  omens  sliouid 
occur,  the  learned  a.strologer  shall  prescribe  expiatory 
ceremonies  for  tlie  benefit  of  the  king.  If  good  omens 
should  occur  at  the  time  tlmre  would  be  an  increase  of 
territory. 

w 


CHAPTER  III.  (50) 

(In  THBl  SW'ORD. 

1.  A sword  50  inches  long  is  a good  one  and  one  25 
inches  long  is  a bad  one;  the  moasureinent  is  to  be  made  by 
means  of  the  inch  scale.  Marks  at  the  odd  inches  would 
produce  evih 

2.  Marks  along  the  back  of  the  sword  of  the  shape  of 
the  Bilva  tree,  a platter,  an  umbrella,  a sivalinga,  pendants, 
a lotus,  a banner  and  a weapon  of  war,  are  indicative  of 
prosperity. 

3.  Marks  of  the  shape  of  a lizard,  a crow%  a heron,  a 
hawk,  a headless  trunk  and  a scorpion  are  indicative  of  evil. 

4.  A sword  that  is  broken,  or  short,  or  blunt,  or 
split  at  the  back,  or  ill-formed  or  without  sound,  is  iadica- 
live  of  evil  ; if  otherw^ise  it  indicates  good  luck- 


-C  TT  • • 3 


liRIITAT  SA1\IIIITA. 


5.  If  tlie  Fword  sliould  sound  like  lyre^  the  kine; 
would  die  ; if  it  should  come  out  of  the  scabbard  of  itself, 
the  king  would  be  defeated  in  battle  ; if  it  should  move 
forward  of  itself,  there  would  be  wars  in  the  land  ; atid  if  it 
should  appear  to  shine  brilliantly,  there  would  bo  success  in 
battle. 

G.  d’he  sword  shall-not  be  taken  out  for  no  purpose  ; 
nor  shall  it  be  rubbed  against  a substance,  nor  shall  its 

j* 

edge  be  looked  at,  nor  its  price  stated,  nor  the  place  of  its 
manufacture  mentioned,  7ior  shall  it  be  compared  to  any- 
thing, nor  shall  it  bo  touched  by  a person  who  is  impure. 

7.  That  is  a good  sw^ord  which  resembles  the  tonguo 
of  the  cow,  or  the  petal',  of  the  blue  lotus  or  the  leaf  of  the 
bamboo  or  assafcetida,  or  one  whose  end  is  pointed  like 
the  end  of  a spear  or  round. 

8.  After  making  a sword  of  the  prescribed  dimen- 
sions, it  shall  be  rubbed  against  a whetstone  that  it  may 
not  be  broken.  If  it  should  break  about  the  hilt,  the 
master  would  die,  and  if  about  the  end,  his  mother  would 
die. 

0..  ' If  there  be  a mark  in  the  handle  of  the  sword, 
there  will  also  be  a mark  in  the  sword  itself  just  as  a spot 
on  the  face  of  a woman  indicates  the  presence  of  a spot  on 
her  privity. 

10.  If  a querent  wearing  a sword  appear  before  an 
astrologer,  the  latter  shall  determine  the  marks  of  the  sword 
from  the  particular  parts  of  his  body  which  the  querent 
may  happen  to  touch. 

11.  If  the  part  of  the  body  touched  sliould  be  the 
head,  there  would  be  a mark  in  the  first  inch  of  the  sword  ; 
if  it  be  the  forehead,  there  would  he  a mark  in  the  2nd  inch  ; 
if  the  eyebrows,  there  would  bo  a mark  in  the  3rd  incli  ; 


11. 


BRIIIAT  SAM  HIT  A. 


*1 
o . 


[cii. 


and  if  it  should  be  the  eye,  there  would  be  a mark  in  the 
4th  inch. 

1’2.  If  the  part  touched  should  be  the  nose,  the  lips, 
the  cheek,  the  chin,  the  ears^  the  neck,  the  shoulders^  the 
breast,  or  the  armpit,  then  there  would  be  marks  on  the 
sword  in  the  oth,  bth,  7tb,  8th,  9th^  1 0th,  11th,  12thj  or 
lJ3th  inch  respectively. 

13.  If  the  part  touched  should  be  the  nipple,  the 
heart,  the  belly,  the  abdomen,  the  navel,  its  root  the  lower 
belly,  the  hips,  or  the  privity,  then  there  would  be  marks 
on  the  sword  in  the  14th,  15th,  lOth,  I7th,  18th,  19th,  20tb, 
or  21  st  inch  respectively. 

14.  If  the  part  touched  should  be  the  two  thighs, 
their  middle  parts,  the  knees,  or  the  shanks,  there  would 
be  marks  on  the  sword  in  the  22nd,  23rd,  24th  or  25tli  inch 
respectively. 

15.  If  the  part  touched  should  be  the  middle  of  the 
shanks,  the  ankle,  the  heels,  the  feet,  or  the  toes,  there 
Avould  be  marks  on  the  sword  in  the  26th,  27th,  28th,  29th 
or  SOtli  inch  respectively.  The  above  are  the  views  of 
Garga. 

16.  The  marks  in  the  several  inches  of  the  sword 
from  the  first  to  the  5th  indicate  respectively  the  death 
of  the  son,  acquisition  of  wealth,  loss  of  wealth,  prosperity 
and  confinement. 

17.  The  marks  in  the  several  inches  from  tbe  6th  to 
the  13th  indicate  respectively  the  birth  of  a son_,  dissen- 
sions, the  getting  of  an  elephant,  the  death  of  a son,  the  ac- 
quisition of  wealth,  the  loss  of  wealth.,  the  getting  of  a wife, 
and  mental  pain  or  grief. 

18.  The  marks  in  the  several  inches  from  the  14th 
to  the  21st  indicate  respectively  gain,  loss,  gain  of  a ^Yife, 
torture,  increase,  death,  joy  and  loss  of  wealth. 


CH.  0-] 


T5UIHAT  P.UnilTA. 


15 


19.  The  marks  in  the  several  indies  from  the  22n(l 
to  the  oObh  indicate  respectively  the  .Mcquisition  of  wealtdi, 
ill  health,  acquisition  of  wealth  again,  death,  wealbl)_, 
poverty,  wealth  again,  death  again,  and  sovereign  power. 

20.  Marks  beyond  the  first  oO  inches  do  not  signify 
much.  Generally  marks  on  the  odd  inches  indicjite  evil  and 
marks  in  the  even  inches  indicate  good*  According  to 
some,  marks  beyond  the  first  30  inches  do  not  signify 
anything  at  all. 

21.  If  the  sword  should  smell  like  the  leaf  of  the 
plant  Assafoetida,  the  Tine  lotus,  the  juice  of  the  rutting 
elephant,  ghee,  saffrondhe  white  water-lily,  or  the  cham- 
paka,  it  indicates  prosperity  ; bat  if  it  should  smell  like  the 
cow’s  urine,  mire,  or  marrow,  it  indicates  evil* 

22.  If  the  sword  should  smell  like  the  tortoise,  serum, 
blood,  or  salt,  it  indicates  fear  and  gaaef.  If  the  sword 
should  appear  bright  as  viduriyn,  gold  or  lightning,  it 
indicates  increased  success  and  health. 

23.  The  following  methods  of  tempering  swords  and 
cutting  instruments  are  taken  from  the  works  of  Sukra  ; 
He  who  desires  bright  prosperity  shall  temper  the  weapon 
in  blood  ; he  who  desires  an  excellent  son  shall  temper  the 
weapon  in  ghee  ; and  he  who  desires  great  wealth  shall 
temper  it  in  water. 

24.  If  the  weapon  be  tempered  in  the  blood  of  the 
mare,  a she  camel  or  a she  elephant,  there  will  be  acquisi- 
tion of  wealth  by  wicked  deeds  ; if  it  be  tempered  in  the 
fat  of  the  fish,  or  in  the  milk  of  the  deer,  or  of  the  horse, 
or  of  the  goat,  or  in  the  juice  of  the  palm  fruit,  the  weapon 
will  become  so  strong  that  the  trunk  of  the  elephant 
can  be  cut  with  it. 

2.5-  After  smearing  oil  over  the  weapon  there  shall 
be  smeared  over  it  again  a preparation  or  mixture  of  the 


IG 


BTulUAT  SAirmtA. 


Fen.  4». 

i. 


black  powder  oE  the  biirnfc  born  of  the  ran:i>  the  excrement 
of  the  turtle  dove  and  of  the  rat,  and  the  milk  or  juice  of 
the  plant  Calotropi^^  gigantea  ((5TQ^^<3suDurrev),  the  weapon 
shall  then  be  tempered  in  any  of  the  ways  described.  It 
will  not  break  at  all  when  rubbed  against  the  whetstone. 

26.  Salt  shall  be  dissolved  in  the  juice  of  the  plantain 
and  the  juice  shall  be  kept  so  for  a clay  ; if  the  weapon  be 
tempered  in  it  the  next  day,  it  will  not  break  when  rubbed 
against  the  wliobstono,  and  no  other  metal  cam  injure  it 
in  any  way. 


CHAPTER  IV.  (51) 

Angavidya. 

1.  It  shall  be  the  duty  of  an  astrologer  to  examine 
and  note  indications  connected  with  the  dih  (direction), 
sthanob  (place),  and  ahrita  (anything  carried),  as  well  as 
the  cheshta  (motion)  connected  with  the  body  of  the  que- 
rent or  of  any  other  person,  and  time.  For  the  All-knowing 
Universal  Intelligence  pervading  all  movable  and  immova- 
ble objects  indicates  coming  events  by  motions  and  casual 
words  to  devout  souls  who  have  faith  in  Him. 

2.  That  place  is  known  as  Sama  Sihana,  which  is 
shaded  over  by  trees  overgrown  with  fruits  and  flowers-, 
inhabited  by  birds  of  flue  glossy  plumage,  unapproached  by 
evil  birds  and  bearing  good  names.  Dwelling  places  of 
the  Devas,  tho  Eishis,  the  Brahmins,  the  Sadhus  and  the 
Sidlias,  places  rendered  agreeable  by  fragrant  flowers  and 
crops,  and  places  covered  over  wdth  green  turf,  and  from 
its  purity  and  waters  calculated  to  exhilirate  one’s  spirit, 
are  also  good  places. 

o.  That  is  not  a good  place  in  which  are  found  trees 
cut  or  split,  or  eaten  through  by  wornas  or  covered  with 


CFf.  4.] 


BRIHAT  SAillUTA. 


17 


thorns,  or  burnt  or  of  ugly  appearance^  or  crooked  or  in- 
habited by  evil  birds,  or  of  bad  names  or  with  most  of  their 
leaves  or  their  bark  dry  or  fallen. 

4.  That  is  not  a good  place  which  is  either  a crema- 
tion ground  or  a deserted  place  of  Tapas  (psychical  train- 
ing) or  any  uneven  ground,  or  ground  with  barren  or 
saline  soil,  or  ground  with  excrement,  charcoal,  pot-shred, 
ash,  or  dried  grass. 

.♦ 

5.  That  is  not  a good  place  in  which  is  found  a per- 
son who  has  abandoned  all  worldly  cares,  or  a mute  person, 
or  a barber,  or  an  enemy,  or  which  may  be  a place  of  de- 
tention or  custody,  or  in  which  may  be  found  butchers, 
chandalas,  gamblers,  ascetics  or  diseased  persons,  or  which 
may  be  a place  where  weapons  or  liquor  may  be  sold. 

6.  The  East,  North  and  North-east  indicate  good 
luck  to  the  querent  ; the  North-west,  West,  South-west, 
South  and  South-east  do  nob  indicate  good  luck.  Fore- 
noon indicates  good  luck,  night,  twilight  hours  and  the 
afternoon  do  not  indicate  good  luck. 

7.  The  various  good  and  bad  indications  described  in 
my  work  on  Yatra  are  also  applicable  here.  Judgment  on 
queries  shall  be  pronounced  on  examining  the  things  before 
the  astrologer,  the  things  that  may  be  brought  before  him 
or  that  the  querent  may  have  in  his  hands  or  about  bis 
clothes. 

8.  The  organs  that  point  to  a male  are  the  thighs, 
lips,  nipples,  testicles,  feet,  teeth,  arms,  hands,  cheek,  hair, 
throat,  nails,  thumb,  arm-pit,  shoulders,  ears,  anus  and  the 
genital  organ. 

9.  The  organs  that  point  to  a female  are  the  brows,  the 
nose,  the  buttocks,  folds  of  the  belly,  the  hip  and  fingers 
with  good  lines ; 


3 


18 


ERIIIAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  4. 


9.  Also  tlie  tongue,  the  neck,  the  calves  of  the  leg, 
the  heels,  the  ankles,  the  navel,  the  sides,  the  heart,  the 
chin,  the  eyes,  the  penis?  the  breast,  or  the  lower  part  of 
the  spine. 

10.  The  organs  that  point  to  a hermaphrodite  are  the 
head  and  forehead.  Face  and  other  parts  of  the  body 
point  to  delay  in  effect.  Parts  of  body  that  point  to  a 
hermaphrodite  as  well  as  parts  of  disagreeable  appearance 
or  that  may  be  wounded  or  broken,  do  not  point  to  success 
in  undertaking, 

11.  If  the  big  toe  is  either  touched  or  shaken,  it 
indicates  sore  eyes;  if  any  other  toe  is  touched  or  shaken, 
there  will  be  grief  on  account  of  one’s  daughter.  If  the 
bead  is  struck,  there  will  be  fear  from  the  rulers. 

12.  If  the  breast  is  accidentally  struck,  husbands  and 
wives  will  part  from  each,  other.  If  any  torn  or  dirty 
clothes  over  a person  be  pulled,  there  will  be  poverty;  if 
while  putting  the  query,  the  querent  should  have  his 
clothes  stuck  to  his  feet,  the  querent  will  gain  his  desired 
object. 

13.  If  lines  be  drawn  on  the  ground  with  the  big  toe, 
the  matter  quesited  relates  to  fields  ; if  the  feet  be  scratched 
by  the  hand,  the  matter  relates  to  a maid  servant. 

14.  If  palm,  bark»dress  or  clothes  be  seen,  the  matter 
quesited  relates  to  a cloth  remaioiog  in  a place  where  hair, 
husk,  bones,  or  ash  is  deposited  ; if  a rope  or  net  be  seen, 
there  will  be  disease,  and  if  bark-dress  be  seen^  the  matter 
relates  to  one’s  kinsmen. 

1.5.  If  long  pepper,  pepper^  dried  ginger,  varida,* 
rodra,  kushta,  cloth,  water,  cumin  seed,  gaudha'*mamsi,t 

* Varicla,  otherwise  known  as  Gala,  a kind  of  perfcm©  or  fragrant 
grass,  Andropogon  SchcEnanthus. 

f Gaaoua-wiamsi : a kind  of  Indian  spikenard. 


CH-  4.] 


ERIHAT  J5AMHITA. 


19 


dill,  or  tagai’a  be  seen,  the  matter  quesited  relates  res- 
pectively to  what  follows  : 

16-  A woman,  a man,  an  offender,  an  aftlicted  person, 
roads,  son,  wealth,  grain,  son,  a biped  creature,  a quadru- 
ped and  the  earth. 

17.  If  the  fruits  of  the  ISfyagrodha,  Madhuka,  Tinduka, 
Jambu,  Platcha,  the  Mango,  or  Badari  be  seen  in  the  hand, 

the  matter  relates  respectively  to  the  acquisition  of  wealth, 

\ 

to  gold,  man,  metal,  cloth,  silver  or  copper. 

18.  If  a vessel  full  of  grain  or  water  be  seen,  there 
will  be  an  increase  of  family.  If  the  excrement  of  an  ele- 
phant, a cow  or  a dog  be  seen,  the  matter  relates  respec- 
tively to  stolen  property,  or  girl  or  friends- 

19.  If  a cow,  an  elephant,  a buifaloe,  a lotus,  silver  or 
tiger  be  seen,  there  will  be  a large  acquisition  of  sheep, 
wealth,  dwelling  house,  sandalwood,  white  silk  or  jewels. 

20.  If  at  the  time  of  query,  there  be  seen  an  old  man, 
a houdha,  ascetic,  or  a Sannyasi,  the  matter  quesited  relates 
to  a friend,  to  gambling,  to  wealth,  to  a prostitute,  to  a 
king  or  to  a woman  just  delivered. 

21.  If  a boudha,  a preceptor,  an  arhat,  a naked 
Sanyasi,  any  omen,  a scientific  work,  or  a fisherman  be  seen, 
the  matter  relates  to  a thief,  a general,  a merchant,  a maid 
servant,  a soldier,  an  article  for  sale,  or  a person  to  be  killed. 

22.  If  a hermit  be  seen,  the  matter  relates  to  a person 
who  has  gone  abroad  to  travel  ; if  a dealer  in  liquor  be  seen, 
the  matter  relates  to  the  protection  of  animals  ,*  if  a person 
be  seen  gathering  grains  in  market  places,  the  matter 
relates  to  some  danger  or  difficulty. 

23.  If  the  querent  be  heard  to  say,  like  to  ques- 
tion,’’ the  matter  relates  to  a wish  to  enjoy  a woman ; if  be 
begins  by  stating  say,”  the  matter  relates  to  a family  , 
if  the  expression  bo  I want  to  sco,”  the  matter  relates  t.o 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


!!() 


[CH.  4. 


gain  ; if  the  expression  be  ‘‘  requests  that  orders  may  be 
made/’  the  matter  relates  to  wealth. 

24.  If  the  expression  be  may  the  information  be 
given/’ the  matter  relates  to  success  ; if  the  expression  be 
‘‘  examine  soon  and  discover  my  thoughts,”  the  matter  re- 
lates to  something  connected  with  roads;  if  the  expression 
be  ‘^what  is  in  the  midst  of 'all  people  should  be  soon. exa- 
mined,” the  matter  relates  to  kinsmen  who  have  been 
abducted  away. 

25.  If  the  cheshta  (motion)  refers  to  the  inner  organs, 
the  matter  relates  to  one’s  own  people  ; if  to  the  outer  or- 
gans, then,  to  other  people  ; if  to  the  toes  or  fingers,  then^ 
to  man  or  a maid  servant;  if  to  the  knees,  then,  to  one’s 
servant ; if  to  the  navel,  then,  to  one’s  younger  sister  ; and 
if  to  the  heart,  then,  to  one’s  wife ; and  to  the  toes  or  other 
fingers,  then,  to  a son  or  daughter. 

26.  If  the  cheshta  refers  to  the  belly,  the  query  re- 
lates to  one’s  mother;  if  to  the  head,  then,  to  one’s  precep- 
tor ; if  to  the  right  or  left  arm,  then,  respectively,  to  one’s 
brother  or  brother’s  wife. 


27-  If,  after  leaving  the  inner  organs?  the  outer  organs 
be  touched,  or  if  at  the  time  of  query,  the  querent  drops 
down  any  thing  in  his  hand  while  ejecting  phlegm  or  pass- 
ing urine  or  excrement,  the  matter  quesited  relates  to  theft. 

28.  If  any  part  of  the  body  be  greatly  bent  and  then 
concealed,  or  if  any  person  be  seen  to  possess  an  empty 
vessel,  the  matter  relates  to  thieves  ; if  at  the  time  of  query, 
such  expressions  as  carried  away,”  fallen,”  ‘‘  wounded,” 

forgotten,”  lost,”  broken/’  gone”  stolen,”  dead,’' 
and  the  like  be  heard,  then,  the  stolen  property  cannot  be 
recovered. 

29.  If  the  husk  of  grain,  bones  or  poison  be  seen,  or  if 
moaning  and  sneezing  be  heard,  the  sick  man  will  die  j if 
the  wind  should  blow  on  one’s  body  and  then  carry  away 


CH.  4.] 


BRIHAT  SAMUITA. 


21 


some  lieavy  substauce  from  within  a room,  judgment  shall 
be  pronounced  that  a person  after  eating  to  excess  and 
being  over-satiated  has  died. 

30.  If  the  forehead  be  touched  or  barley  be  seen,  then 
Salya  rice  is  indicated;  if  the  breast  be  touched,  then  the 
Shashtika  rice  is  indicated  ; if  the  neck  be  touched,  barley 
rice  is  indicated. 

31.  If  the  abdomen,  nipples,  belly  or  knees  be  touch- 
ed, the  matter  relates  respectively  to  black-gram,  milk, 
gingelly,  or  barley;  if  one  is  seen  to  swallow  or  lick  the 
lip,  sweet  flavor  is  indicated. 

82.  If  the  tonghe  be  struck  against  the  pallet,  the 
matter  refers  to  an  object  of  desire  ; if  one  is  seen  to  make 
a wry  face,  sour  substance  is  indicated  ; if  one  is-  seen  to 
hiccough,  then  the  substance  indicated  is  either  pungent, 
bitter  or  astringent;  if  one  is  seen  to  sputter,  salt  substance 
is  indicated. 

33.  If  one  is  seen  to  spit  phlegm,  a small  dry  bitter 
substance  is  indicated ; if  the  brow,  the  cheek,  or  the  lip  be 
touched,  the  flesh  of  the  vulture  has  been  eaten. 

34.  If  the  head,  neck,  hair,  chin,  throat,  ears,  the 
shanks,  the  knees  or  the  lower  belly  be  touched,  judgment 
shall  be  pronounced  that  the  meals  eaten  contained  res- 
pectively the  flesh  of  the  elephant,  buffalo,  sheep,  pig,  cow, 
hare  or  deer. 

35.  If  bad  omens  be  seen  or  heard,  the  meals  eaten 
contained  the  flesh  of  the  iguana  and  the  fish;  questions 
connected  with  pregnancy  shall  be  determined  as  follows^ 

36.  If  the  organs  or  parts  of  body  representing  the 
male,  female  or  hermaphrodite  sex  be  seen,  thought  over 
or  touched,  a child  of  that  sex  will  be  born  ; if  any  drink, 
rice  or  flower  be  seen,  prosperity  is  indicated  ; if  the  point 
between  the  brows  or  if  fingers  be  touched  by  the  thumb, 
the  matter  relates  to  pregnancy;  if  honey,  ghee,  gold. 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA* 


o. 


gems,  corals  and  the  like  be  touched 
inotber  or  the  nurse  or  the  son  should 
is  indicated  : 


[CH.  4. 

or  seeu,  or  it  the 
be  near,  pregnancy 


38.  If  the  hand  is  seen  on  the  belly,  the  matter  relates 
to  pregnancy  ; if  bad  omen  should  occur,  the  matter  does 
not  relate  to  pregnancy  ; if  the  belly  be  pulled  or  the  seat 
be  disturbed,  or  if  the  hands  be  seen  one  over  the  other, 
the  matter  does  not  relate  to  pregnancy. 

S9.  If  the  right  nostril  be  touched,  the  delivery  will 
occur  after  a month  ,*  if  the  left  nostril  be  touched,  after  two 
months ; not  so  if  the  ears  be  touched;  but  after  two 
months,  if  the  right  ear  be  touched,  and  after  four  months, 
if  the  left  ear  be  touched  ; also  after  four  months  if  the 
right  nipple  be  touched,  and  after  eight  months  if  the  left 
nipple  be  touched. 

40.  The  root  of  the  plaited  hair  indicates  3 sons,  the 
ears  indicate  2 daughters,  the  hands  5 sons,  the  tip  of  the 
thumb  3 sons,  the  tip  of  the  big  toe  5 sons,  the  two  heels 
a daughter. 

41.  If  the  right  or  left  thigh  be  touched?  a son  or  a 
daughter  is  indicated;  if  the  centre  or  end  of  the  forehead 
be  touched,  4 or  3 sons  will  respectively  be  born. 

42.  The  head,  the  forehead,  the  brows,  the  ears,  the 
cheek,  the  jaw,  the  teeth,  the  neck,  the  right  shoulder,  the 
left  shoulder,  the  hand,  the  chin,  the  wind  pipe, 

43.  The  breast,  the  right  nipple,  the  left  nipple,  the 
heart,  the  sides?  the  belly,  the  hip,  the  buttocks,  the  anus, 
the  genital  organs,  the  two  thighs,  the  knees,  the  ankles 
and  the  feet  are  respectively  parts  of  the  body  represented 
by  the  twenty-seven  asterisms  from  Krittika. 

44.  Thus  have  I described  the  several  matters  connect* 
cd  with  Angavidya  on  a full  examinatiou  of  the  treatises 
relating  to  the  subject  ; that  person  who,  possessed  of  a 


C!{T.  4.] 


P.KIHAT  SAilHITA, 


broad  iutellecb  and  of  a j^enerous  disposition  masters  this 
branch  of , the  sciencej,  will  be  respected  by  the  king  and 
people. 


CHAPTER  V.  (o2) 

On  Pimples- 

1.  Pimples  breaking  out  in  the  Brahmins,  the  Ksha- 
triyas,  the  Vysias  and  the  Siidras  should  respectively  be 
white,  red,  yellow  arfd  black,  in.  order  that  they  may 
produce  the  effects  described  below; 

2.  If  glossy  and  dlear  pimples  break  out  in  the  head, 
there  will  be  acquisitidn  of  wealth  ; if  in  the  crown  of  the 
head,  there  will  be  good  fortune  ; if  in  the  two  eye-brows; 
there  will  be  bad  luck  and  the  meeting  of  friends  ; if 
between  the  eye-brows,  there  will  be  loss  of  character  ; if 
on  the  eye-lids,  there  will  be  sorrow  and  the  gaining  of 
the  desired  object  ; if  in  the  temples,  the  person  will  turn 
out  a hermit  ; and  if  on  both  sides  of  the  nose  wdiere  the 
tears  fall,  there  will  be  great  anxiety. 

3.  If  the  pimple  breaks  out  in  the  nose,  the  person 
will  get  new  cloth  ; if  in  the  cheek,  he  will  get  a son  ; if 
in  the  lips  or  just  below  them,  he  will  get  good  food  ; if  in 
the  fore-head  or  in  the  corners  of  the  mouth,  there  will  be 
acquisition  of  wealth  ; if  in  the  throat,  the  person  will 
acquire  ornaments,  food  and  drink  ; if  in  the  ears,  he  will 
acquire  a collection  of  ornament  and  a knowledge  of  Atma, 

4.  If  the  pimple  breaks  out  in  the  joint  of  the  head, 
the  neck,  the  heart,  the  two  nipples,  the  two  sides,  or  in  the 
breast,  the  person  will  get  respectively  a blow  with  an 
iron  rod,  a blow,  a son,  a son  again,  any  gain,  grief,  and 
any  object  of  desire  ; if  it  breaks  out  in  the  two  shoulders? 
there  will  be  much  wandering  for  alms  and  destruction  ; 
and  if  in  the  two  arm-pits,  the  person  will  acquire  wealth 
and  comfort. 


24 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  5, 


5.  If  the  pimple  breaks  out  in  the  back  tliere  will  be 
grief  and  ruin  ^ if  in  the  two  upper  arms,  the  enemy  will 
perish  ; if  in  the  two  wrists,  there  will  be  imprisonment  ; 
if  in  the  two  lower  arms,  there  will  be  an  acquisition  of 
ornaments. 

G.  If  the  pimple  breaks  out  in  the  hands,  fingers  or 
belly,  there  will  respectively  be  an  acquisition  of  wealth, 
good  luck  or  grief  5 if  it  breaks  oat  in  the  navel,  the  person 
will  get  good  food  and  drink  ,*  if  just  under  the  navel,  there 
will  be  theft  of  property  by  robbers  ,*  if  in  a man’s  genital 
organs,  he  will  get  a young  woman  and  good  sons  ; if  in  the 
anus  ,*  he  will  acquire  wealth,  and  if  in  the  testicles,  there 
will  be  good  fortune. 

7.  If  the  pimple  breaks  out  in  the  thighs,  the  person 
wdll  get  a carriage  and  a woman  ; if  in  the  knees,  there  will 
be  injury  from  enemies  ,*  if  in  the  shanks,  there  will  be 
wound  from  weapons  ; and  if  in  the  ankles,  there  will  be 
trouble  from  a journey  on  foot  and  from  imprisonment. 

8.  If  the  pimple  breaks  out  in  the  buttocks,  heels  or 
soles  of  the  feet,  there  will  respectively  be  loss  of  wealth, 
adultery  or  the  troubles  of  a journey  on  foot  ; if  in  the  toes, 
there  will  be  imprisonment  ,*  and  if  in  the  big  toe  there  will 
be  presents  from  kinsmen. 

9.  Any  extraordinary  eruptions,  boils  and  pimples 
breaking  out  on  the  right  side,  and  hurts,  occurring  on  the 
left  side  of  males,  indicate  the  acquisition  of  wealth  ; the 
reverse  is  the  case  with  females. 

10.  Thus  have  I stated  the  effects  of  pimples  breaking 
out  iu  the  several  parts  of  the  body  from  head  to  foot,  the 
same  effects  ajDply  to  wounds,  dark  spots,  pustules,  small 
bunches  of  hair  of  crowded  growth  and  to  a whirling  growth 
of  hair. 


13RIHAT  SAMTIITA,  ’ 25 

\ 

chapter  yi.  (6(!). 

Ox  House-building. 

! 

1.  We  shall  now  proceed  to  treat  of  tlie  science  of 
lionse-building,  which  has  come  down  to  ns  from  the  Pdsliis 

who  obtained  it  from  Brnhma,  for  the  pleasure  of  learned 
Jyoutishakas. 

2.  At  ojie  time,  a monster  appeared  with  a body,  so 
vast  as  to  conceal  the  Earth  and  the  sky.  The  Devas  then 
caught  hold  of  parts  of, his  body  aud  forcibly  laid  him. 

I down  with  his  face  towards  the  ground. 

3.  The  several  Devas  now  preside  over  the  several 
parts  of  the  body  held  by  them.  The  monster  therefore, 
known  as  Vastuprusha,  represents  in  his  body  all  the  DevJ 
by  order  of  Brahma. 

4.  The  king’s  house  shall  be  one  of  five  sorts.  The 
breadth  of  the  superior  house  shall  be  108  cubits,  and  that 
of  each  of  the  four  inferior  houses  shall  be  8 cubits  less 

, than  the  next  preceding  one.  The  length  of  each  house 
shall  be  one-quarter  as  much  more  as  its  breadth. 

5.  The  general’s  house  shnll  be  one  of  five  sorts.  The 
I breadth  of  the  superior  house  shall  be  04  cubits,  and  . that 
I of  each  of  the  four  inferior  houses  shall  be  6 cubits  less  than 

the  next  preceding  one.  The  length  of  each  house  shall 
i be  one-sixth  as  much  more  as  its  breadth. 

. 6.  The  pnme-minister’s  house  shall  also  be  one  of  five 

sorts.  The  breadth  of  the  superior  house  shall  be  00  cu- 
bits, and  that  of  each  of  the  four  inferior  houses  shall  be  four 
cubits  less  than  the  next  preceding  one.  The  length  of 
each  liouse  shall  be  one-eighth  as  much  more  as  its  breadth. 

I he  dimensions  of  the  houses  of  the  queens  shall  be 

one-half  of  the  dimensions  of  tho  houses  of  the  prime-minis- 
I ter. 

7*  The  first  prince’s  houso  shall  also  be  one  of  five 


26 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA* 


[CH.  6. 


sorts.  The  breadth  of  the  superior  house  shall  he  80  Qubits, 
and  that  of  the  each  of  the  four  inferior  houses  shall  be  six 
cubits  less  than  the  next  preceding  one.  The  length  of 
each  house  shall  be  one-third  as  much  more  as  its  breadth. 

The  dimensions  of  the  houses  of  the  younger  princes 
shall  be  one-half  of  the  dimensions  of  the  houses  of  the  first 
prince. 

8.  The  houses  of  the  tributary  princes,  of  worthy 
persons  and  of  the  the  king’s  officers;,  shall  be  of  the  differ- 
ence of  the  dimensions  of  the  houses  of  the  king  and  prime 
minister.  The  houses  of  the  chamberlain  and  of  the  king’s 
concubines  and  artists  shall  be  of  the  difference  of  the  dimen- 
sions of  the  houses  of  the  king  and  the  first  prince. 

9.  The  houses  of  the  superintendent  of  the  king’s 
household  and  of  the  comptroller  of  public  accounts  shall 
be  of  the  dimensions  of  the  king’s  treasury^  and  bed-rooms. 
The  houses  of  the  peons  of  the  superintendents  shall  be  of 
the  difference  of  the  dimensions  of  the  houses  of  the  first 
prince  and  the  prime  minister, 

10.  The  houses  of  the  Court  astrologers,  priests  and 
physicians,  shall  be  one  of  five  sorts — ^the  superior  one  be- 
ing 40  cubits  broad  and  the  breadth  of  the  four  inferior 
ones  shall  be  severally  4 cubits  less  by  turns  ^ the  length  shall 
be  one-sixth  as  much  more  as  the  breadth. 

11.  If  the  houses  in  all  the  cases  can  be  made  as 
high  as  they  are  broad,  they  will  conduce  to  prosperity.  In 
cases  where  a house  has  an  inner  verandah,  the  length  of  the 
house  shall  be  twice  its  breadth. 

12.  The  houses  of  the  four  castes  from  the  Brahmins 
downwards  are  also  of  five  sorts — the  breadths  of  the 
houses  being  32,  28,  24,  20  and  16  cubits.  A house  less 
than  16  cubits  broad  shall  be  for  the  use  of  the  men  of  low 
class. 


CH.  G.] 


BRTHAT  SAMHITA. 


27 


13.  The  length  of  tlie  houses  of  Brahmins  shall  be 
one-tenth  as  much  more  as  tho  breadth,  that  of  the  houses 
of  Kshatryas  shall  bo  one-eighth  as  much  more;  that  of 
the  liouses  of  the  V3’sias  shall  be  one-sixth  as  much  more; 
and  that  of  the  houses  of  the  Sudras  shall  be  one-fourth  as 
much  more. 

14.  The  dimensions  of  the  treasury  and  bed  rooms 
shall  be  the  difference  of  the  dimensions  of  the  houses  of 
the  king  and  the  general.  The  dimensions  of  the  houses  of 
those  honored  by  the  king  shall  bo  of  the  difference  of  the 
dimensions  of  the  houses  of  the  general  and  the  several 
castes  from  the  Brahmins  downwards. 

15.  The  dimensions  of  the  houses  of  the  Parasavas 
and  the  like  shall  be  one  half  of  the  sum  of  the  dimensions 
of  the  houses  prescribed  to  their  class.  If  the  houses 
discribed  above  for  all  classes  be  of  greater  or  smaller 
demensions  than  what  we  have  stated,  they  will  produce 
evil. 

16.  No  dimensions  are  prescribedlfor  the  houses  of 
the  cows,  the  Vana-prasthas,  for  granaries,  for  the  arsena  , 
for  fire  and  for  sexual  enjoyment.  However  men  learned 
in  house-building  are  opposed  to  the  breadth  of  these 
exceeding  100  cubits. 

17.  Add  70  to  the  breadth  (in  cubits)  of  the  (house 
of  the  king  or  the  general  and  divide  the  sum  by  14  and 
the  same  sum  again  by  35.  The  quotients  will  give  the 
breadths  of  the  inner  veranda  and  of  the  outer  veranda 
in  front  of  the  house  door  of  the  house  of  the  king  or  the 
general. 

18.  In  the  case  of  the  five  sorts  of  houses  of  the  four 
castes  from  tho  Brahmins  downwards,  the  breadth  of  tho 
inner  verandas  shall  respectively  be  4 cubits  7 inches,  4 
cubits  10  inche«,  3 cubits  3 inches,  3 cubits  15  inches,  and 
3 cubits  13  inches. 


BJilHAT  SAMHITA, 


28 


[CE.  6, 


19.  The  breadth  of  the  outer  veranda  in  front  of  thiD 
Louse  door  in  the  case  of  these  five  Louses  shall  respectively 
be 'd  cubits  19  inches^  3 cubits  8 iucheSj  2 cubits  20  inches, 
2 cubits  18  iuchesj  and  2 cubits  3 inches. 

20.  The  breadth  of  the  Veedhi  around  the  house  shall 
be  one-third  of  the  breadth  of  the  inner  veranda.  If  the 
Veedhi  be  in  front  of  the  house,  such  house  is  known  as 
SoshneesJia^ 

21.  If  the  Veedhi  be  found  behind  the  house,  it  is 
known  as  Sayasrayam^  and  if  the  Veedhi  be  found  on  a side 
of  the  house,  such  house  is  known  as  Savasfitamhham,  and  if 
the  Veedhi  be  found  all  round  the  house^  the  house  is  known 
as  Susthitam.  Men  learned  in  house-building  speak  favor- 
ably of  every  one  of  these  Veedhis. 

22.  The  height  of  the  floor  shall  be  one-sixteenth  of 
the  breadth  of  the  house  plus  4 cubits.  Generally,  the  height 
of  the  floor  of  a house  may  be  one-twelfth  less  according  to 
the  nature  of  the  ground. 

23.  The  thickness  of  the  walls  shall  be  one-sixteenth 
of  the  breadth  of  the  house.  The  wall  may  be  built  of  burnt 
bricks  or  of  wood. 

24.  In  the  cases  of  the  house  of  the  king  and  general, 
add  to  the  breadth  of  the  house  (in  cubits)  its  eleventh 

part  and  ad  70  to  the  sum,  the  height  of  the  entrance  shall 
be  so  many  inches.  The  breadth  of  the  entrance  shall  be 
one-half  of  the  height. 

25.  In  the  case  of  the  houses  of  the  four  castes  fi'ooi 
the  Brahmins  downwards,  add  one -fifth  of  the  breadth  of 
the  house  to  18  indies ; nine-eighths  of  this  sum  is  the 
breadth  of  the  entrance.  Doable  th©  breadth  of  the  entrance 
is  its  height. 

26.  The  breadth  of  the  two  vertical  frames  shall  be 
as  many  inches  as  the  number  of  cubits  in  the  height  of  the 


cn.  6.] 


BRIIIAT  SAMHITA. 


1^9 

entrance.  The  brendth  of  the  bottom  and  top  frames  shall 
be  half  as  much  more  as  the  breadth  of  tfie  side  frames. 

27.  Multiply  the  height  by7  ; one  eightieth  of  the 
product  shall  be  the  thickness  of  each  frame.  Multiply  the 
height  of  the  house  by  9;  one  eiglitieth  of  the  product 
shall  be  the  diameter  of  the  pillar  at  the  bottom.  Nine- 
tenths  of  this  shall  be  the  diameter  of  the  pillar  at  the  top. 

28.  A four-sided  pillar  or  column  is  known  as  Ruchalca, 
An  eight  sided  pillar  is  known  as  Vajra.  An  eighteen  sided 
pillar  is  known  as  Bvivajra,  and  a thirty-two  sided  one  is 
known  as  Pralinalca.'  A pillar  that  is  round  in  the  middle 

A 

is  known  as  Vritta,  -• 

29.  Divide  the''£eight  of  the  pillar  into  equal  parts. 
The  parts  are  known  as  Vahana^  Ghata^  Padma,  JJttaroslitha^ 
and  80  on,  the  names  returning  again. 

30.  The  thickness  of  the  heavy  beams  of  the  sloping 
roof  shall  be  that  of  tho  pillars.  Tlje  other  beams  higher 
up  the  roof  shall  be  each  three-fourths  as  thick  as  the 
beam  next  below  it. 

31.  The  house  of  the  King  or  Deva  which  is  surround- 
ed by  outer  verandas  on  all  the  four  sides,  and  with  an 
entrance  on  eachsido;,  is  known  as  Sarvato-hliadra^ 

32.  The  house  which  is  surrounded  by  four  distinct 
outer  verandas  and  with  an  entrance  on  each  side  except 
on  the  wesK  is  known  as  Pfandyavaita. 

33.  The  house  which  has  two  outer  verandas  commen- 
cing at  the  entrance  with  an  external  veranda  on  tho 
southern  side  and  one  on  the  western  side  and  with  an  en- 
trance on  the  southern  (side,  is  known  as  Vardhamana. 

84.  The  house  which  has  an  outer  veranda  on  tho 
eastern  side,  two  parallel  outer  verandas  on  the  southern 
side,  and  ending  in  tho  east  with  a separate  one  on  the 


oO  BE! HAT  SAMHITA.  [CH.  6. 

Tiorfcliern  side  and  with  an  entrance  on  the  eastern  side^  is 
known  as  SwastiJca. 

35.  The  house  which  has  distinct  outer  verandas  on 
each  side  with  an  entrance  on  each  side  except  the  northern 
side,  is  known  as  Euchaha. 

36.  The  Nandyavarata  and  Vardhamana  houses  are 
the  best ; the  Swastika  and  Ruchaka  houses  are  of  middle 
importance,  and  the  remaining  house  known  as  Sarvato- 
bliadra,  is  best  fitted  for  kings  to  live  in. 

37.  The  house  which  has  inner  verandas  on  all  ex- 
cepting the  northern  side,  is  known  as  Tliranya  ndbJia-  It 
brino-s  on  wealth.  The  house  which  has  inner  vei-andas  on 
all  excepting  the  eastern  side,  is  known  as  Sukslietra*  It 
brings  on  prosperity. 

38.  The  house  which  has  inner  verandas  on  all  ex- 
cepting the  southern  side,  is  known  as  CJiuUi.  It  destroys 
wealth.  The  house  which  has  inner  verandas  on  all  ex- 
cepting the  western  side,  is  known  as  Eakshaghm.  It 
brings  on  the  deatli  of  the  sons  and  produces  enmity. 

39.  The  house  which  has  inner  verandas  on  the  western 
and  southern  sides  is  known  as  Siddarta,  and  the  house 
which  has  inner  verandas  on  the  western  and  northern  sides 
is  known  as  Yamasurya  ; that  which  has  inner  verandas  on 
til©  eastern  and  northern  sides  is  known  as  Banda,  and  that 
which  has  such  verandas  on  the  eastern  and  southern  sides, 
is  known  as  Vata, 

40-  The  house  which  has  inner  verandas  on  the  eastern 
and  western  sides  is  known  as  Grahachulli^  and  that  which 
has  such  verandas  on  the  northern  and  southern  sides  is 
known  as  Kacha.  The  Siddarta  house  will  bring  on  wealth 
and  the  Yamasurya  house  will  bring  on  the  death  of  the 
master. 

41.  The  Daiida  house  will  bring  on  death  by  a danda 
or  a club ; the  Vata  house  will  bring  on  fears  and  disturb* 


BRIITAT  SAMIIITA. 


SI 


CH.  G.] 


nnco ; the  Clinlli  house  will  dostv()y  wealth,  and  the  Kacha 
house  will  bring  on  the  eniniry  of  kiusuieii. 

42.  Divide  tlie  house  ground  into  81  squares  by  10 
lines  drawn  from  east  to  west  and  10  lines  drawn  Irom 
north  to  south.  32  Devas  occupy  the  32  exterior  squares 
1 1 ^ / iTT-o  o r»  n 1*^  t.liw  inre.r  snuares  (as  follows)  ; 


ta,  innra,  Durya,  oaiyH,  um  iftfi,  niiu  jTLiitfu  iivouri. 

44  &;45.  The  eight  southeru  squares  9,  18,  27,  SG,  45, 
54,  G3  and  72  are  respectively  occupied  by  Vayu,  Poosha, 
Vitalha,  Brihatkshata,  Yama,  Gandharva,  Bhrihgaraja  and 
Mriga.  The  eight  western  squares,  81,  80,  79,  78,  77,  76, 
75  and  74  are  respectively  occupied  by  Pitri  Douvarika, 
Sugriva,  Kusumadanta,  Varnna,  Asura,  Sosha  and  Papa* 


BIUHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  6. 


VC) 

OAi 


yakslimaj  and  the  8 noribern  squares,  73,  64,  55,  4G_,  37,  28, 
19  and  10  are  res[)ectively  occupied  by  the  Devas  Roga^ 
Alii,  Mukhya,  Bliallata,  Soma  Bbujaga,  Aditi,  and  Diti^ 

4b&4"7.  The  nine  central  squares  ol,  32,  33,  40,  41, 

42,  40,  50  and  51  are  occupied  by  Brahma.  The  square  23,  due 
east  of  Brahma  is  occupied  by  Aiyama.  From  Aryama,  tihe 
alternate  squares  all  round  Brahma  from  left  to  right,  viz., 
25,43,61,  59,  57,  £9  and  21  are  respectively  occupied  by 
Savita.  Vivasvan,  Indra,  Mitra,  Rajayakslima,^PriDlividhara 
and  xApavatsa. 

4 T The  inner  north-eastern  square  11,  is  occupied  by 
Apa  ; the  inner  south-eastern  square  17  is  occupied  by 
Savitra;  the  inner  south-western  square,|7 B is  ^occupied 
by  Jaya,  and  the  inner  north-western  square,  05,  is  occupied 
by  Rudra. 

49.  The  group  of  five  Devas  occupying  the  north” 
eastern  portion  of  the  house-ground,  (squares  1,  2,  10,  1 1 
and  21j,  viz.,  Agni,  Parjanya,  Diti,  Apa  and  Apavatsa  and 
similar  groups,  each  of  five  Devas,  occupying  the  south- 
eastern,  south-western  and  north-western  portions  of  the 
house-ground,  are  known  as  Padikas. 

50»  The  remaining  20  Devas  occupying  the  other 
squares  are  known  as  Dwipadas.  The  Devas  occupying  the 
due  eastern,  southern,  western  and  northern  squares— 23, 

43,  59,  33— viz.,  Ai'yama,  Yivasvan,  Alitra  and  Prilividhara 
are  known  as  Tripadas. 

5l,  The  Vastu-purusha  (house  demon)  lies  with  his 
face  turned  towards  the  ground  and  head  in  the  north- 
east. Agni  holds  his  head,  Apa  his  face,  Aryanra  his 
right  nipple  and  Apavatsa  his  breast. 

^52=  The  Devas  from  Parjanya  to  Surya  occupying  the 
outer  squares  hold  respectively  the  right  eye,  ear,  breast, 
and  shoulder  ,*  the  five  Devas  from  Satya  hold  the  right 
arm  ; Savita  and  Savitra  hold  the  right  hand;  Yitatha  and 
Brihatkshata  hold  the  right  side. 

53.  Yivaswaii  holds  the  bellv;  the  four  Devas  from 
Yama  hold  the  right  thigh,  knee,  shank  and  buttock. 

54.  These  Devas  hold  the  right  limbs  of  the  Yastu 
purusha.  Similarly  the  oth^r  devas  hold  the  left  limbs.  In- 
dra  and  Jaya  hold  his  penis;  Brahma  his  heart  and  the 
Pitri  Devas  his  feet. 

53  & 56.  Or,  divide  the  house  ground  into  sisly-fonr 
equal  squares;  draw  the  main  diagonal  lines.  The  fourcen-* 


\ 


cn.  6. 


BKIHAT  SAMHITA. 


33 


tral  squares  marked  2S,  2Q,  3G,  37,  are  occupied  by  Brahma. 
The  four  squares  occupying  the  iuner  corners,  viz.,  19,  22^  46, 
and  43,  as  well  as  the  four  squares  occapying  the  outer  cor- 
ners, viz.,  1,  8,  64  and  57,  are  divided  eacli^into  two  halves. 
The  other  squares  all  round  Brahma,  viz.,  20,  21,  30,  38^ 
45,  44,  35  and  27,  and  the  other  outer  squares,  viz.,  2 to  7,  16 


2 

'1 " " • ■■  '■ " 

3 

9 

7 

/s 

9 

i / 

r 

ys 

yA^ 

'y  s 

•// 

ye 

7\0 

2 0 

2 / 

yz 

Z 3 

2 S 

2S' 

zff 

Z 7 
✓ 

30 

ay 

32 

32 

sy. 

S\7 

ae 

Zo 

Zy 

ss 

28 

X 

az 

S'S 

S' z 

SO 

6^0 

6"  y 

SZ 

as  the  exact  centres  of  the  several  squares,  are  known  as 

Marmasthalas  vital  parts.  These  parts  shall  not  be  mo= 

lested  by  the  erection  of  pillars  over  them  or  in  any  other 
way.  . 


34 


BEIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  6. 


58.  If  these  vital  parts  are  defiled  or  molested  by  im- 
pure substances;,  pot-shreds,  pegs  or  pillars  and  by  Salyas 
(substance  lying  underground),  the  master  of  the  house  will 
suffer  in  those  parts  of  his  body  which  correspond  to  the 
parts  thus  tormented. 

59.  That  portion  of  the  house  ground  contains  Salya 
which  corresponds  to  the  part  of  body  scratched  by  the 
master  of  the  house  (at  the  time  of  his  first  entry)  or  where 
bad  omens  or  portents  connected  with  fire  occur  at  the 
time  of  the  homa  ceremony. 

60.  If  the  Salya  be  wood,  there  will  be  destruction  of 
■wealth  ; if  bones,  animals  will  suffer,  and  there  will  be  much 
suffering  from  diseases  ; if  metals,  there  will  be  injury 
from  weapons  ,*  and  if  skulls  or  hair,  there  will  be  death. 

61.  If  the  Salya  bo  charcoal,  there  will  be  fear  of 
robbeiy  ; if  ashes,  there  will  always  be  fear  from  destructive 
fires  ,*  if  it  be  any  substance  other  than  gold  or  silver  lying 
buried  at  the  Marmasthala,  there  will  be  great  fears. 

62.  If  the  Salya  be  the  husk  of  paddy  lying  either  at 
the  Marmasthala  or  at  other  places,  there  will  be  acquisition 
of  wealth  ,*  if  it  be  the  teeth  of  snake  lying  at  the  Marma- 
sthala, there  will  be  misery. 

63.  The  diagonal  line,  from  the  Roga  Deva  (73)  to 
Vayu  Deva  (9)  is  known  as  a Yamsa-  The  diagonal  line  from 
Pitri  Deva  (bl)  to  Agni  Deva  (1)  is  another  Yamsa.  A 
line  drawm  from  Yitatha  Deva  (27)  to  Sosha  Deva  (75)  is 
also  a Yamsay  and  that  drawn  from  Mukkya  Deva  (55)  to 
Bhrisa  Deva  (7)  is  another  Yamsa.  A line  drawn  from 
Jayanta  Deva  (3)  to  Bhringa  Baja  (63)  is  also  a Yamsa^ 
and  a line  drawn  fromAditi  (19)  to  Sugriva  (79)  is  another 
Y arnsa^ 

64.  The  six  lines  cut  one  another  in  nine  points. 
These  points  are  known  as  Atimarma  places.  The  area  of 
a Marmasthala  is  equal  to  one-eighth  of  the  area  of  a square. 


CH.  6.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


85 


65.  Tlie  breadth  of  a Vamsa  line  is  as  many  inches 
as  tlie  length  of  a side  of  a square  is  in  yards,  and  the 
length  ol  a Sira  is  one  and  a half  times  the  breadth  of  the 
Vamscb  line. 

66.  If  the  master  of  the  house  desire  prosperity,  he 
shall  take  particular  care  of  the  portion  of  the  house  which 
is  the  seat  of  Brahma.  ' If  this  portion  be  defiled  by  im- 
purities, the  master  of  the  house  will  suffer  miseries. 

67.  If  the  right  arm  of  the  Vastu-purusha  be  wanting, 
there  will  be  loss  of  wealth  and  women  will  lose  their 
character ; if  the  left  arm  be  wanting,  there  will  be  loss  of 
wealth  and  grain  ; if  the  head  be  wanting,  every  virtue 
will  quit  the  house  hold. 

68.  If  any  of  the  senses  of  the  Vastu-purusha  should 
suffer  injuries,  women  will  lose  their  character,  sons  will 
perish,  aud  the  master  of  the  house  will  become  a slave 
under  another.  If  the  Vastu-purusha  does  not  suffer  in  any 
way,  the  dwellers  of  the  house  will  get  honor,  wealth  and 
comfort. 

69.  The  Devas  occupy  their  several  places  as  above 
enumerated  not  only  in  houses  but  in  towns  and  villages. 
The  Brahmins  and  other  castes  shall  live  in  places  appro- 
priate to  them. 

70.  The  Brahmins  and  other  castes  shall  dwell  res- 
pectively on  the  northern,  eastern,  southern  and  western 
sides. 

71.  Either  in  the  division  of  the  house  ground  into 
81  squares  or  in  that  into  64  squares,  the  effects  of  having 
the  main-entrance  in  spots  occupied  by  Agni  and  the  other 
Devas  are  as  follow  : 

72.  If  the  entrance  is  opened  in  any  of  the  8 eastern 
squares  beginning  from  the  north-eastern  corner,  the  effects 
will  respectively  be  injury  from  fire,  birth  of  daughters, 


BEIHAT  SAMHITA, 


[oh.  6. 


gain  of  immense  wealth,  the  friendship  of  the  king,  increase 
of  anger,  fclie  vice  of  lie,  that  of  cruelty  and  that  of  theft. 

73.  If  the  entrance  is  opened  in  any  of  the  8 southern 
squares  beginning  from  the  south-eastern  corner,  the  effects 
will  respectively  be  few  sons,  servitude,  becoming  a chan- 
dala,  excessive  eating  and  drinking  with  an  increase  of  sons, 
anger,  ingratitude,  poverty  and  the  loss  of  sons  and  of 
valor. 

74.  If  the  gate  is  opened  in  any  of  the  8 western 
squares  beginning  from  the  south-western  corner,  the  effects 
will  respectively  be  suffering  of  sons,  the  increase  of  the 
enemy,  the  want  of  wealth  and  sons,  the  increase  of  sons, 
of  wealth  and  of  strength,  opulence,  fear  from  kings,  loss  of 
wealth,  and  disease. 

75‘  If  the  gate  is  opened  in  any  of  the  8 northern 
squares  beginning  from  the  north-western  corner,  the  effects 
will  respectively  be  increase  of  cruelty  and  kinsmen,  increase 
of  the  enemy,  gain  of  wealth  and  sons,  the  possession  of  all 
virtues,  the  acquisition  of  sons  and  wealth,  hatred  of  sons, 
the  loss  of  character  of  women  and  the  loss  of  wealth. 

76.  There  will  bo  misery  if,  opposite  to  the  gate, 
there  be  roads,  trees,  street  corners,  wells,  pillars  or  gutters. 
If  these  should  be  beyond  a distance  of  double  the  height 
of  the  house,  they  will  produce  no  harm* 

77.  If  the  obstruction  be  a car  running  street,  the 
master  of  the  house  will  die  3 if  it  be  a tree,  the  son  will 
suffer  if  it  be  a permanent  mire,  there  will  be  grief  ,*  if  it 
be  any  gutter  or  passage  for  water,  there  will  be  waste. 

78.  If  the  obstruction  be  a well,  there  will  be  an  attack 

of  epilepsy  ; if  it  be  the  image  of  some  Deva,  there  will  be 

death  ; if  it  he  a pillar,  women  will  lose  their  chastity  ; if  the 

gate  be  opposite  to  the  squares  of  Brahma,  the  family  will 
perish, 


cii.  C.] 


EPJTTAT  SAMTTITA. 


37 


79*  If  tlie  door  slioold  open  of  itself,  there  would  be 
an  attack  of  madness  ; if  it  should  close  of  itself,  the  family 
would  perish  ; if  the  gate  should  exceed  its  stated  dimen” 
sions,  there  would  be  fear  from  kings  aud  robbers  ; and  if 
the  gate  be  in  a low  ground,  there  will  be  grief. 

80.  Gate  over  a gate  and  a gate  which  it  is  difficult 
to  enter  will  not  conduce  to  prosperity  ; an  entrance  which 
is  not  closed  will  produce  suffering  from  hunger  ; an  en- 
trance which  is  either  very  short  or  bent  will  bring  about 
the  ruin  of  the  familjx 

81.  A troublesome  entrance  will  bring  on  troubles. 
One  that  is  bent  inside  will  bring  on  destruction  ; one  that 
is  bent  outside,  willbidug  on  travels  to  foreign  land  3 and  one 
that  is  not  in  the  proper  spot,  will  bring  on  theft  by 
robbers. 

82.  The  front  entrance  shall  not  be  of  the  size  of  the 
inner  entrance  3 such  front  entrance  shall  be  constructed 
after  due  ceremonies  with  water-pots,  fruits^  flowers  aud 
with  curdled  milk. 

80.  The  four  corners  of  the  house  beginning  from  the 
north-eastern  point,  are  occupied  respectively  by  four  Deva 
women  known  as  Charaki,  Viclari,  Fibtana  and  Raksliasi. 

84.  Those  that  live  in  the  corners  of  houses,  villages 
and  towns  will  suffer  miseries.  Persons  subsisting  on  the 
flesh  of  dogs  and  the  chandalas,  will  become  prosperous  by 
living  in  such  corners- 

8-5.  The  Laksha  (a),  the  Banyan,  the  Udumbara  (h)  and 
the  Aswattba  will  bring  on  miseries  if  situated  on  the  south, 
Avest,  norch  and  east  sides  of  the  house,  aud  they  wflll  bring 
on  prosperity  if  they  be  respectively  situated  in  the  north, 
east,  south,  and  west  side  of  the  house. 

(a)  Lakslia  : Ficus  virens, 

(h)  Udumbara  : Indian  Fig  tree, 


38 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA, 


[CH.  6. 


86.  If  thorny  trees  grow  near  houses,  there  will  be 
fear  from  enemies  ; if  milky  trees,  there  will  be  waste  of 
w^ealth  ; if  fruit  trees,  the  children  will  die.  The  wood  of 
these  trees  shall  also  be  rejected. 

87.  If  it  be  felt  inconvenient  to  remove  the  several  trees 
mentioned  above,  a number  of  superior  trees  shall  be 
grown  between  them.  These  are  Punuaga  (a),  Asoka  {h)y 
Arishta  (c),  Vaknla  (d),  Panasa  (e),  Sami  (/j  and  Sala  (g.) 

88.  Any  spot  where  the  ground  is  smooth  and  with- 
out holes,  where  the  earth  is  sweet,  fragrant  and  of  bright 
appearance  and  where  there  grow  superior  crops,  trees  and 
creepers  is  calculated  to  afford  comfort  to  the  weary  travel- 
ler, and  if  a house  is  permanently  built  in  such  a spot  how 
happy  should  the  dwellers  feel. 

89.  If  the  house  of  the  minister  be  near,  there  would 
be  loss  of  wealth.  If  the  house  of  a cheat  be  near,  sons 
will  die  ; if  a temple  be  near,  there  will  be  various  fears, 
and  if  four  roads  meet  in  the  neighbourhood,  the  house 
will  bear  an  evil  reputation. 

90.  If  a Boudha  temple  should  be  near,  there  would 
be  fear  from  evil  spirits;  if  ant-hills  with  numerous  holes 
be  near,  there  will  be  danger  ; if  any  low  ground  or  ditch 
be  near,  there  will  be  suffering  from  thirst;  and  if  a 
tortoise  dwell  near  there  will  be  loss  of  wealth. 

91.  If  the  northern,  eastern,  southern  or  western 
side  be  low,  the  Brahmins,  the  Kshatryas,  the  Yysias  or 
the  Sudras  will  suffer  respective!}^.  The  Brahmins  may 
live  in  all  places ; but  the  other  castes  shall  live  in  their 
appropriate  places. 

a,  h,  f,  and  g : These  terms  are  explained  in  pages  141  to  143 
of  Part  I. 

(c).  Arishta  : The  soap-berry  tree. 

(cZ).  Vaknla  : The  tree  Mimusops  Elengi.  LoQ^iDULh, 

(ej,  Panasa  ; The  Jack  tree,  iSiedirLDiruo). 


I 


CH.  6.]  BEIHAT  SAMHITA.  S9 

92.  Ill  the  centre  of  the  house-site  dig  a pit  a cubit 
deep,  (broad  and  long)  and  fill  it  with  the  earth  taken  from 
it ; if  the  earth  is  found  too  little,  there  wdll  bo  misery  ;1£  it 
be  found  just  enough,  the  site  is  one  of  middle  importance, 
and  if  it  be  found  too  much,  there  will  be  increase  of  wealth. 

93-  Or  fill  the  pit  with  water  and  walk  100  feet  from 
it.  If,  on  returning,  tlie  water  be  found  not  to  have  fallen, 
there  will  be  an  increase  of  wealth  3 or  if  the  quantity  be 
an  adhaka  of  64  phalas,  there  will  be  an  increase  of  wealth. 

94.  Or  place  an  unburnt  earthen  vessel  in  the  pit ; 
and  in  it  burn  a wick.  The  ground  will  be  fit  for  the  use 
of  that  class  of  men  in  whose  direction  the  flame  is  seen  to 
be  inclined. 

95.  The  ground  will  also  be  fit  for  the  use  of  that 
class  of  men  the  flower  of  whose  appropriate  color  is  found 
neither  to  fade  nor  lose  its  hue  when  thrown  in  a pit  in  the 
ground.  Generally  a ground  is  fit  to  live  in,  if  a person 
has  a special  liking  for  it* 

96.  If  the  ground  be  white,  red,  yellow  or  black,  or  if 
it  be  found  to  smell  like  ghee,  blood,  cooked  rice  or  liquor, 
the  Brahmins,  the  Kshatryas,  the  Yysjas  or  the  Sudras 
wall  respectively  prosper. 

97.  If  the  ground  be  over-grown  with  kusa  grass, 
sara  or  wild  reeds,  the  durva  grass,  or  reeds,  or  if  its  flavor 
bo  found  to  be  sweet,  astringent,  sour  or  pungent,  the 
Brahmins,  the  Kshatryas,  the  Vj^syas  or  the  Sudras  will  res- 
pectively prosper. 

98.  The  house  ground  shall  first  be  either  ploughed 
or  grown  with  the  sprouts  of  seed  grains  or  dwelt  by  cows 
or  by  Brahmins.  The  person  who  desires  to  build  a house 
in  it  shall  in  an  auspicious  hour,  as  ascertained  by  an 
Astrologer,  enter  it  and  commence  building  work. 

99.  He  shall  then  perform  puja  to  the  Devas  with 
various  cakes,  curdled  milk,  colored  rice,  sandal  paste, 


40 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[gh.  6- 


flowers  and  perfumed  smoke ; and  shall  also  shew  due 
honor  to  Brahmins  and  to  the  builders  and  shall  satisfy 
them  with  presents. 

jOO.  The  Brahmins^  the  Kshatrias^  the  Vysyas  and 
the  Sudras  shall  respectively  touch  their  foreheads, 
breasts,  thighs  and  feet  and  draw  lines  marking  the  site  of 
the  house  to  be  built, 

101.  The  person  (the  master  of  the  house)  taking  in 
his  hand  gold,  gems,  silver,  pearls,  curdled  milk,  fruits, 
flowers  or  colored  rice,  shall  draw  the  line  with  his 
thumb,  the  middle  fiuguer  or  the  fore-fiager. 

102.  If  the  line  be  drawn  with  a weapon,  there  will 
be  death  by  weapons.  If  it  be  drawn  with  a piece  of  metal 
there  will  be  imprisonment.  If  with  ashes,  there  will  be  fear 
from  destructive  fires;  if  with  a piece  of  straw,  there  will 
be  fear  from  robbers  ; and  if  with  a piece  of  wood,  there 
will  be  fear  from  kings. 

103.  If  the  line  be  drawn  with  the  foot  or  be  indis- 
tinct and  not  straight  there,  will  be  fear  from  weapons  and 
from  grief.  If  it  be  drawn  with  a piece  of  leather,  with 
charcoal,  bone  or  tooth,  the  master  of  the  house  will  suffer 
miseries. 

104.  If  the  line  be  drawn  from  right  to  left,  there 
will  be  enmity  ; and  if  from  left  to  right,  there  will  be  pros- 
perity. If  at  the  time  of  drawing  the  line,  cruel  words 
are  heard,  or  if  anybody  be  seen  to  spit  or  to  sneeze,  there 
will  be  misery. 

105.  The  builder  shall  enter  the  house  either  halt 
built  or  wholly  built,  and  shall  carefully  observe  where  the 
master  of  the  house  stands  and  what  parts  of  his  body  ho 
touches. 

106.  If  at  the  time  birds  be  seen  to  sound  disagree- 
ably^  facing  the  Sun,  there  will  be  bone  corresponding  to 


cn.  C.] 


BRIHAT  SAMniTA- 


41 


that  of  the  part  of  body  touched;,  lying  buried  at  the  spot, 
where  the  master  of  the  house  stands. 

107*  Or  if,  at  the  time,  an  elephant,  a horse,  a dog 
or  the  like  be  heard  to  sound,  then  the  bones  of  these  ani- 
mals corresponding  to  that  of  the  part  of  body  touched  by 
the  master  of  the  house,  will  be  found  buried  at  the  spot. 

108-  If,  when  the  rope  is  tied  up,  the  ass  is  heard 
to  cry,  bone  lies  buried  ; and  the  same  thing  may  be  declar- 
ed in  case  the  rope  is  crossed  over  by  a dog  or  a jackal. 

109.  If  birds  ai’e  seen  to  sing  melodiously,  facing 
the  quarter  opposite  to  the  Sun,  there  is  treasure  under 

t' 

ground  either  at  the'-spot  where  the  master  of  the  house 
stands  or  in  that  part  of  Yastu-piirusha’s  body,  which  cor- 
responds to  the  part  of  body,  touched  by  the  master  of  the 
house. 

HO.  If  the  rope  should  break  there  would  be  death  ; 
if  the  2^eg  should  come  out  or  be  found  turned  upside  down, 
there  would  be  severe  disease  ; and  if  the  master  of  the 
house  or  the  builders  should  forget  to  take  with  them  any 
necessary  substance  or  article,  there  would  also  be  death. 

111.  If  the  water  pot  should  slip  down  the  shoulder, 
there  would  be  head-ache.  If  the  water  should  run  out, 
the  family  Avould  suffer;  if  the  pot  should  be  broken,  the 
servants  would  die;  and  if  it  slip  down  from  the  hand,  the 
master  of  the  house  would  die. 

112.  After  hnisbing  the  pooja,  the  first  foundation 
stone  shall  be  laid  on  the  north-eastern  corner,  and  then,  all 
round  from  left  to  right,  the  other  stones  shall  be  laid.  The 
pillars  shall  also  be  erected,  in  the  same  order. 

113.  The  ceremony  of  erecting  the  tall  pillars  of  the 
entrance  shall  be  performed  carefully  with  umbrellas,  flower 
wrtaths;  cloth,  perfumed  smoke  and  sandal. 

6 


42 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  6. 


114.  The  same  good"  effects  shall  be  predicted  from 
the  entry  of  birds  into  holes^  the  shaking  of  their  wings, 
their  fall  and  flight  as  in  the  case  of  the  Indra  Dhwaja. 

115.  If  the  north-eastern  corner  be  of  a higher  level 
than  the  rest^  there  will  be  loss  of  wealth  and  sous ; if  the 
ground  emit  bad  smell,  sons  will  die  ; if  the  ground  be 
of  irregular  shape,  kinsmen  will  die  ; if  the  sides  are  irre- 
gular, there  will  be  no  pregnancy. 

116.  He  that  desires  prosperity  shall  raise  the  house- 
ground  equally  on  all  sides.  If  any  portion  of  the  ground 
be  of  a higher  level  than  the  rest,  there  will  be  misery.  If 
unavoidable,  the  eastern  or  northern  side  may  be  of  a slight- 
ly higher  level. 

117.  If  the  eastern  side  be  of  a higher  level,  there 
will  be  hatred  of  friends  ; if  the  southern  side,  there  will 
be  deaths  in  the  family  ; if  the  western  side,  there  will  be 
loss  of  wealth  ; and  if  the  northern  side,  there  will  be  grief, 

118.  The  apartment  for  the  Devas  shall  be  built  in 
the  north-east;  the  kitchen  in  the  south-east ; the  room  for 
the  household  utensils  shall  be  erected  in  the  south-west ; 
and  the  treasury  and  the  granary  rooms  shall  be  erected  in 
the  north-west. 

119.  If  there  be  any  piece  of  water  in  the  east,  south- 
east, south,  south-west,  west,  north-west,  north  and  north- 
east, there  will  respectively  be  the  death  of  sons,  injury 
from  fire,  troubles  from  enemies,  quarrels  among  women, 
unchastity  among  women,  poverty,  increase  of  wealth  and 
increase  of  sons. 

120.  For  the  purpose  of  house-building  other  trees 
shall  be  cut  down  than  those  in  which  birds  reside,  or  that 
are  broken  or  have  dried  or  are  burnt,  or  in  which  the 
Devas  live  or  which  grow  on  cremation  grounds,  as  well  as 
milky  trees,  the  dJiava^  the  vihhitahaj  the  margosa  and  the 
arams. 


cn.  7.1 


BrjHAT  SAMHITA. 


121.  Cooked  rice  shall  be  offered  and  pnja  performed 
to  the  tree  at  night,  and  it  shall  be  cut  down  from  left  to 
right  nest  day.  If  it  falls  on  the  north  or  east  side,  there 
will  be  increase  of  wealth,  and  if  it  falls  on  any  other  side, 
it  shall  be  rejected. 

122.  If  the  cut  be  not  irregular,  the  tree  will  bring 
cn  prosperity ; if  the  portion  cut  be  of  yellow  color,  there 
will  be  an  iguana  inside  the  tree. 

123.  If  the  color  be  bright-red,  there  will  be  a frog 
within  ; if  black,  a cobra  ; if  red,  a blood-sucker;  if  of  the 
color  of  kidney  bean^  there  will  be  a stone  within  ; if  brown, 
there  will  be  a rat,  and  if  of  the  color  of  the  sword,  there 
will  be  water  within^ ; 

124.  He  that  desires  prosperity  shall  not  sleep  on  a 
higher  level  than  that  of  grain,  cows,  preceptor,  fire,  and 
the  Hevas  ; nor  shall  he  sleep  under  a beam,  nor  with  his 
head  towards  the  north  or  west,  nor  naked  nor  with  wet 
feet. 

125.  After  due  puja  to  the  Devas  with  perfumed 
smoke,  sandal  paste  and  various  articles  of  food,  the  house 
shall  be  entered  with  a large  quantity  of  flowers,  with  fes- 
toons and  water  pots,  the  Brahmins  chanting  vedic 
hymns. 


CHAPTEE  VII  (54) 

On  Undee-cuerents. 

1.  We  shall  now  proceed  to  treat  of  the  science  of 
under-currents  by  which  man  may  get  at  water  and  observe 
the  duties  of  life  and  be  happy.  Just  in  the  same  way  as 
there  are  arteries  for  the  circulation  of  blood  in  human 
bodies,  there  are  water  courses  runniog  in  all  directions 
above  and  below  within  the  Earth- 


I 


BRIHIT  SAMHiTi. 


[cm.  1. 


44 

2.  Water  that  falls  from  the  clouds  ig  of  one  color  and 
one  flavor;  after  contact  with  the  Earth,  both  the  color  and 
the  flavor  vary  with  those  of  the  ground  through  which  it 
flows.  This  will  be  found  to  be  the  case  on  actual  exami- 
nation. 

3.  The  lords  of  the  eight  quarters  of  the  horizon 
beginning  from  the  east  and  going  round  from  left  to  right 
are  Indra,  Agni,  Yama,  Nirurithi,  Varuna,  Vayu,  Soma  and 
Eesana. 

4.  There  are  eight  currents  bearing  the  same  names 
as  those  of  the  eight  Dik-patis  (lords)  above  enumerated^ 
and  there  is  a big  earrent  in  the  centre  known  as  Mabasira. 
Besides  these  there  are  hundreds  of  well-known  minor 
currents  bearing  distinct  names. 

5.  There  are  four  currents  issuing  from  the  centre  of 
the  Earth  and  reaching  the  east,  south,  west  and  north. 
These  are  good  currents.  There  are  four  other  currents 
running  towards  the  north-east,  south-east,  son th -west  and 
north-west.  These  produce  evil.  We  shall  now  proceed  to 
state  the  several  indications  leading  to  the  discovery  of 
Under- currents. 

6.  At  a distance  of  3 cubits  to  the  west  of  the 
Vetasa  (a)  growingon  dry  lands  and  at  the  depth  of  a man 
and  a half,  there  runs  a current  westwards. 

7.  In  the  course  of  digging  will  be  found  a white 
frog  at  the  depth  of  half  a man ; below  it  there  will  be 
yellow-earth,  below  it  again  there  will  be  a piece  of  stone 
blocking  up  the  current,  and  under  it  there  is  good  water. 

8.  At  a distance  of  3 cubits  to  the  north  of 
the  Jambu  and  at  the  depth  of  two  men  runs  a current 
eastwards.  While  digging,  the  earth  will  be  found  to  be 

(a) . The  names  of  over  100  trees  are  given  in  this  chapter.  They 
are  eiplainod,  in  the  glossary  printed  at  the  end  of  Chapter  65. 


cn.  7.] 


BBIHAT  SAMHITA.. 


45 


■white  and  of  the  color  of  metal  and  there  will  be  a frog  at 
the  depth  of  a man. 

9.  If  there  be  an  ant-hill  to  the  east  of  the  Jambu  and 
near  it^  there  runs  a current  to  the  south  of  the  ant-hill  at 
the  depth  of  two  men.  The  water  will  be  very  sweet. 

10.  In  digging,  there  will  be  a fish  at  the  depth  of 
half  a man  ; as  far  below  it,  there  will  be  a stone  of  the 
color  of  the  dove  ; below  it  again  there  will  be  black  soil  ; 
and  below  it  there  will  be  water  which  will  last  for  years. 

11.  At  the  distance  of  3 cubits  to  the  west  of  the 
Udumbara  and  at  th(5  depth  of  two  men  and  a half  there 
runs  a current  of  good  water.  In  digging,  there  will  be 
found  a white  snake  at  the  depth  of  a man  ; below  it  there 
will  be  a piece  of  stone  black  as  collyrium. 

12.  If  there  be  an  ant  hill  to  the  north  of  the  Arjnna 
tree,  there  will  be  a current  at  the  distance  of  3 cubits  to 
the  west  of  the  hill  and  at  the  depth  of  3 men  and  a half. 

13.  In  digging  there  will  be  found  a white  iguana  at 
the  depth  of  half  a man  ; below  it,  at  the  depth  of  a man, 
will  be  found  loose  black  earth  ; below  it  will  be  found  soil 
yellow-white  in  color  and  of  good  odor,  and  below  it  there 
will  be  much  water. 

14.  If  the  plant  known  as  Nirgundi  be  seen  to  grow 
on  an  ant-hill,  there  will  be  a current  at  a distance  of  3 
cubits  to  the  south  of  the  hill  and  at  a depth  of  two  men 
and  a quarter.  The  water  will  last  for  ever  and  will  be 
sweet. 

15.  At  intervals  of  the  depth  of  half  a man  there  will 
be  found  a red  fish,  yellow  earth,  white  soil,  earth  mixed 
with  pebbles  and  finally  water. 

16.  If  there  be  an  ant-hill  to  the  east  of  the  Badari, 
then,  to  the  west  of  it  there  will  be  water  at  the  depth  of  3 
men.  In  digging  there  will  be  found  a white  house  lizard 
at  the  depth  of  half  a man. 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CR.  7. 


17.  If  both  the  Palasa  and  the  Badari  be  seen  to  grow 
together,  there  will  be  water  on  the  west  side  at  a depth  of 
three  men  and  a quarter.  In  digging  there  will  be  found  a 
frog  at  the  depth  of  a man. 

18.  If  the  Bilva  and  the  Udumbara  be  seen  to  grow 
together,  there  will  be  a current  at  a distance  of  3 cubits 
to  the  south  and  at  a depth  of  3 men.  In  digging  there 
will  bo  found  a black  frog  at  the  depth  of  half  a man. 

19.  If  an  ant-hill  be  seen  at  the  foot  of  the  Kako- 
dumbari,  there  will  be  a current  at  the  spot  at  a depth^of  3 
men  and  a half  running  westward* 

20.  In  digging,  at  the  depth  of  half  a man,  the  soil 
. will  be  found  yellow  white  ; below  it  there  will  be  a stone 

of  the  color  of  milk  ; and  below  it  there  will  be  found  a rat 
of  the  color  of  the  Kumuda. 

21.  If,  on  dry  lands,  the  tree  Campilla  be  seen  to 
grow,  there  will  be  a current  at  the  depth  of  3 cubits  to  the 
east  of  the  tree  and  the  current  will  run  southwards* 

22.  In  digging,  at  the  depth  of  a cubit  the  soil  will 
be  of  the  color  of  the  blue  lotus,  or  of  the  dove.  Below  it 
there  will  bo  seen  a fish  of  the  smell  of  the  goat  and  below 
it  there  will  be  a small  quantity  of  salt  water. 

23.  On  the  nortb-western  side  of  the  tree  Sonaka,  at  a 
distance  of  2 cubits  and  at  a depth  of  3 men,  there  runs  a 
current  known  as  Kumuda. 

24.  If  an  ant-hill  be  seen  on  the  southern  side  of  the 
Yibhitaka  and  near  it,  there  will  be  a current  at  the  depth 
of  a man  and  a half  to  the  east  of  the  ant-hills. 

25.  If  an  ant-hill  be  seen  at  the  distance  of  a cubit  to 
the  w^est  of  the  Vibhitaka,  there  will  be  a current  at  the 
depth  of  four  men  and  a half  running  north  wards. 

26.  In  digging,  there  will  be  found  a white  Viswam- 
bhara,  at  the  depth  of  a man  ; below  it  there  will  be  a 


cn.  7-] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


47 


crimson  colored  stone.  Tho  current  that  runs  on  the  west- 
ern side  will  dry  up  in  three  years. 

27.  If  an  aut-hiil  overgrown  with  the  Kusa  grass  bo 
Been  on  the  north-eastern  side  of  the  Koviciara,  there  will 
be  a current  at  the  depth  of  four  men  and  a half  between  the 
tree  and  tho  ant-hill  and  the  water  supply  will  be  iuexhaus- 
tiblo. 

28.  In  digging;  there  will  be  a snake  of  the  color  of 
the  inside  of  the  lotus  and  at  the  depth  of  a man  ; below  it 
the  soil  will  be  red  ; bplow  it,  will  be  found  a precious  stone 
known  as  Kurvinda.  . 

29.  If  an  ant-hill  be  seen  surrounding  the  foot  of  the 
Saptaparna,  there  will -be  a current  to  the  north  of  the  tree 
at  the  depth  of  five  men  and  the  indications  are  given 
below. 

BO.  In  diggings  there  will  be  seen  a green  frog  at  the 
depth  of  half  a man  ; below  it  the  soil  will  be  of  the  color 
of  yellow  orpiment  ; below  it  there  will  be  found  a stone  of 
the  color  of  the  clouds^  and  below  it  there  will  be  a current 
of  good  water  running  northwards. 

31.  Generally,  if  a frog^be  seen  below  a tree,  there  will 
be  a current  at  the  distance-  of  a cubit  from  the  tree  and  at 
the  depth  of  four  men  and  a half. 

32.  In  digging  there  will  be  found  a mongoose  at  the 

depth  of  a man  ; below  it  there  will  be  black  soil  ,*  below  it 

there  will  be  yellow  soil ; below  it  there  will  be  white  soil; 

and  below  it  will  bo  found  a stone  resembling  the  skin  of 
the  frog. 

33.  If  a snake  hole  be  seen  to  the  south  of  the  Ka- 
ranja,  there  will  bo  a current  at  the  distance  of  2 cubits  to 
the  south  of  the  hole  and  at  the  depth  of  three  men  and  a 
half. 

B4.  In  digging,  there  will  be  found  a tortoise  at  the 
depth  of  half  a man  ; below  it  there  will  be  a current  fiow“ 


48 


BSIHAT  8AMHITA. 


[CH.  7. 

ing  eastward  and  another  of  sweet  water  flowing  north- 
wards ^ below  it  there  will  be  a green  stone  and  below  it 
there  will  be  water. 

35.  If  a snake  hole  be  seen  to  the  north  of  the  Ma- 
dhooka,  there  will  de  a current  at  the  distance  of  5 cubits  to 
the  west  of  the  hole  and  at  a depth  of  seven  men  and  a 
half. 

36.  In  diggings  at  the  depth  of  a man  there  will  be 
found  a cobra  3 below  it  the  soil  will  be  red-black  ; below  it 
there  will  be  a stone  of  the  color  of  horse-gram ; below  it 
there  will  be  a current  flowing  eastwards — an  ever-running 
stream  covered  with  foam. 

37*  If  there  be  a fine  ant-hill  overgrown  with  the 
kusa  grass  and  the  durva  grass  to  the  south  of  the  Tilaka 
tree,  there  will  be  a current  to  the  west  of  the  hill  at  the 
depth  of  five  men  running  eastward. 

38.  If  a snake  hole  be  found  to  the  west  of  the  Ka- 
damba,  there  will  be  a current  at  the  distance  of  3 cubits  to 
the  south  of  the  hole  and  at  a depth  of  five  men  and  three- 
quarters  of  a man. 

39.  The  current  runs  in  a northerly  course  ; the  sup- 
ply of  mineral  water  is  inexhaustible  ; in  digging  there 
will  be  yellow  soil  at  the  depth  of  a man  ; below  it  there 
will  be  frog  of  the  color  of  gold. 

40.  If  either  the  Palm  or  the  Cocoa  be  surrounded 
by  an  ant-hill  at  its  foot,  there  will  be  a current  at  the  dis- 
tance of  6 cubits  to  the  west  of  the  tree  and  at  a depth  of 

four  men. 

41.  If  there  be  a snake  hole  to  the  south  of  the  Kapit- 
tah,  there  will  be  a current  at  a distance  of  7 cubits  to  the 
north  of  the  hole  and  at  a depth  of  five  men. 

42.  In  digging,  there  will  be  a snake  of  many  colors 
at  the  depth  of  a man ; below  it  there  will  be  black  soil  ; 
below  it  there  will  be  a stone  blocking  up  the  curieat  ; to 


49 


cil.  7.]  B Kill  AT  SAM  HIT  A- 

tliG  west  of  tlio  stone  tliere  will  bo  wbifcc  soil  and  below  it 
runs  a current  northwards- 

43.  If  to  the  north  of  the  Asmantaka  there  be  seen 
cither  tlie  Badari  or  a snake  hole^  then^  at  the  distance  of  6 
cubits  to  the  south  of  such  tree  or  holej,  there  will  bo  a cur- 
rent at  the  depth  of  three  men  and  a half. 

44.  Ill  digging,  at  the  depth  of  a man,  there  will  be  a 
tortoise  j at  an  equal  depth  below  it  there  will  be  a stone 
covered  with  dust  ; below  it  again,  the  soil  will  be  a mix- 
tui’e  of  sand  and  mud  ;and  below  it  there  will  bo  seen  first 
a current  flowing  soulh wards  ;and  to  the  north  of  this  there 
will  be  another  curretit  running  eastwards. 

45.  If  to  the  i>qrth  of  the  Haridra  there  be  seen  an 
ant-hill,  there  will  be  a current  at  the  distance  of  3 cubits 
to  the  east  of  the  hill  and  at  a depth  of  five  meoj  and 
three-quarters  of  a man. 

43.  In  digg’Ing,  at  the  depth  of  a man,  there  will  bo 
a black  snake  ; below  it  there  will  be  a stone  green  as 
emerald  ; below  it  there  will  be  black  soil  ; below  it  there 
will  be  a current  flowing  westwards,  and  to  the  south  Of 
this  current  there  wdll  be  another  current. 

47.  If  in  the  middle  of  an  arid  tract  of  land  there  be 
seen  to  grow  plants  or  trees  wbich  generally  grow  in  wet 
places,  or  if-Veerana  and  the  Durva  grass  be  seen  to  grow 
luxuriantly,  there  will  be  a current  at  the  spot  at  the  depth 
of  a man. 

48.  There  will  also  be  a current  at  the  distance  of  two 
cubits  to  the  south  of  the  Bharangi,  Trivrita,  Danti,  Suka- 
rapaji,  Lakshmana  and  Navamalika,  and  at  a depth  of 
three  men. 

49.  Where  trees  are  seen  to  grow  luxuriantly  with 
low  branches  and  short  twigs,  there  will  be  undercurrents 

ill  the  neighbourhood  ; but  where  trees  are  seen  with  holes 

7 


BPJHAT  SAMHITA. 


50 


[CH.  7. 


and  stiff  leaves  and  of  ciisngreeable  appearance^  there  will 
be  no  water  near. 


50  & 51.  If  the  trees  Tilaka,  Amrataka,  Varuna,  Bhalla- 
taka,  Bilva^  Tinduka,  Ankolla,,  Pindara,  Sirisha,  Anjana, 
Panishakaj  Yanjula  and  Atibala,  be  seen  to  grow  luxu- 
riantly and  surrounded  by  ant-hillS;,  there  will  be  a current 
at  the  distance  of  three  cubits  to  the  north  of  the  trees'and  at 
a depth  of  four  men  and  a half. 

52.  If  there  should  appear  a spot  covered  with  grass 
where  there  is  usually  no  grass  or  a spot  devoid  of  grass 
while  there  is  grass  all  round,  there  will  respectively  be 
under  such  spot  a current  or  a treasure. 

53.  If  a thorny  tree  or  plant  should  grow  without 
thorns,  or  if  thorns  should  appear  on  trees  or  plants  that 
are  without  them,  there  will  respectively  be  a current  or  a 
treasure  at  the  distance  of  three  cubits  to  the  west  of  the  spot 
and  at  a depth  of  three  men  and  three  quarters  of  a man. 

64,  Where  the  ground  when  struck  with  the  foot  pro- 
duces a loud  sound,  there  will  be  a current  at  the  spot 
bowing  northwards  at  a depth  of  three  men  and  a half. 

55.  If  a branch  of  a tree  should  either  be  low  or  white, 
there  will  be  a current  directly  under  it  at  the  depth  of 
three  men. 

56.  If  the  fruits  or  flow  ers  of  a tree  should  be  of 
extraordinary  growth  or  luxuriance,  there  would  be  a 
current  at  the  distance  of  three  cubits  to  the  east  of  the  tree 
and  at  a depth  of  four  men.  Under  the  current  there  are 

stones  and  yellow  soil. 

57.  If  the  Kantakarika  should  bo  seen  to  grow  with- 
out thorns  or  with  white  blossoms,  there  will  be  a current 
at  the  spot  at  a depth  of  three  men  and  a half. 

58.  If  the  Khavjuri  should  be  seen  to  grow  with  only 


err.  7J 


BRIflAT  SAMHITA, 


51 


two  branches  in  the  middle  o£  an  arid  tract,  there  will  be  a 
current  to  the  west  of  the  tree  at  a depth  of  three  men. 

59.  If  the  Karnikara  or  Palasa  be  seen  with  white 
blossoms,  there  will  be  a current  at  a distance  of  two  cubits 
to  the  north  of  the  tree  and  at  a depth  of  three  men. 

GO.  Where  there  is  heat  or  smoke,  there  will  be  a 
current  at  the  spot  at  a depth  of  two  men.  Tlie  current 
will  be  oue  of  great  dimensions  carrying  a large  body  ot 
water. 

Cl.  Where  the  crops  are  found  to  die  out  or  appear 
over-luxuriant  or  very  white,  there  will  be  a large  currei  t 
at  the  spot  at  the  depth  of  two  men. 

62.  We  shall  now  proceed  to  describe  the  under- 
currents in  arid  tracts  of  land.  The  currents  are  generally  of 
the  shape  of  the  ass’s  neck. 

63.  If  an  ant-hill  be  seen  to  the  north-east  of  the 
Peelu  tree,  there  will  be  a current  to  the  west  of  such  aut- 
hill  running  northwards  at  a depth  of  five  men. 

64.  In  digging,  the  soil  will  bo  found  to  be  of  the 
color  of  a mixture  of  green  and  yellow  at  the  depth  of  a 
man  ; then  at  equal  depths  there  will  be,  one  below  the 
other,  green  earth,  then  a stone,  and  then  Avater. 

65.  If  an  ant-hill  be  seen  to  the  east  of  the  Peelu 
tree,  there  will  be  a current  at  the  distance  of  four  and  a 
half  cubits  to  the  south  of  it  and  at  a depth  of  seven  men. 

66.  In  digging,  at  the  depth  of  a man,  there  will  be  a 
snake  spotted  black  and  white  and  of  the  length  of  a cubit  ; 
to  the  south  of  it  there  will  be  a large  current  of  salt  water. 

67.  If  a snake  hole  be  seen  to  the  north  of  the  Kareera 
then  to  the  south  of  it  there  will  be  a current  of  sweet  water 
at  a depth  of  ten  men  ,*  in  digging  there  will  be  seen  an 
yellow  frog  at  the  depth  of  a man. 

68.  If  a snake  hole  be  seen  tc  the  Avest  of  the  Rohitaka 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[ch.  7. 


p;  9 

•j 

there  will  be  a current  at  a distance  of  three  cubits  to  the 
south  of  the  hole  and  at  a depth  of  twelve  men  running 
westwards. 

G9.  If  an  ant-hill  be  seen  to  the  east  of  the  Indrataru, 
there  will  be  a current  at  the  distance  of  a cabit  to  the 
west  of  the  hill  and  at  a depth  of  fourteen  men  ; in  digging 
there  will  be  seen  an  iguana  of  brown  color  at  the  depth 
of  a man. 

70.  If  a snake  hole  be  seen  to  the  north  of  the  Suvar- 
na  tree^,  there  will  be  a current  at  the  distance  of  two  cubits 
to  the  south  of  the  hole  and  at  a depth  of  fifteen  men. 

71.  The  water  in  the  above  spot  will  be  saltish;  in 
digging,  there  will  be  a mongoose  at  the  depth  of  half  a 
man  ; below  it  there  will  be  a copper  colored  stone;  below 
it  there  will  be  red  soil,  and  below  it  there  will  be  water 
running  southwards. 

72.  If  the  Badari  and  the  Rohita  be  seen  to  grow  to- 
gether, though  there  may  be  no  ant-hill  in  the  neighbour- 
hood, there  will  be  a current  at  the  distance  of  three  cubits 
to  the  west  of  the  trees  and  at  a depth  of  sixteen  men. 

73.  In  digging,  there  will  be  seen  a scorpion  at  the 
depth  of  a man ; below  it  there  will  be  white  soil ; below  it 
there  will  be  a stone  resembling  a ball  of  flour,  and  below 
it  runs  a current  of  sweet  water  flowing  southwards  ; to  the 
north  of  this  current  there  will  be  another  current. 

74.  If  the  Badari  and  the  Kareera  be  seen  to  grov/  to- 
gether, there  will  be  a large  current  at  a distance  of  three 
cubits  to  the  west  of  the  trees  and  at  a depth  of  eighteen 
men  flowing  in  a north-easterly  direction. 

75.  If  the  Peelu  and  the  Badari  Im  seen  to  grow  to- 
gether, there  will  be  a current  containing  an  abundant 
Supply  of  salt  water  at  a distance  of  three  cubits  to  the  east 
of  the  trees  and  at  a depth  of  twenty  men. 


cii.  7.] 


BniHAT  SAMITITA. 


58 


7C.  If  the  Kakubha  bo  seen  to  grow  witli  either  ilie 
bamboo  or  tlie  Bilva^  there  will  be  a current  at  the  distance 
of  two  cubits  to  the  west  of  the  trees  and  at  a doplli  of 
twenty- five  men. 

77.  If  eitlier  the  Dhnrva  or  the  Knsa  grass  be  seen  to 
grow  white  on  ant-hills,  a well  may  be  sunk  at  tlie  spot 
and  the  current  runs  at' the  depth  of  twenty-one  men. 

78.  Where  the  Ivadamba  is  seen  to  grow  or  ant-hills 
are  found  O'S'ergrown  with  Dhurva  grass,  there  will  be  a 
current  at  the  distance  of  three  cubits  to  the  west  of  sucli 
tree  or  hills  and  at  a 'depth  of  twenty-five  men. 

79.  If  tlie  Rohitaka  tree  be  seen  to  grow  in  the  middle 
of  three  ant-hills  with  three  other  trees,  there  will  be  an 
undercurrent  at  the  spot. 

80.  In  digging,  there  will  be  a stone  at  a distance  of 
four  cubits  and  sixteen  inches  to  the  north  of  the  central 

spot  and  at  a depth  of  forty  men. 

81.  If  the  Sami  is  found  covered  with  knots  and  an 
ant-hill  be  seen  to  the  north  of  it,  there  will  be  a current  at 
the  distance  of  five  cubits  to  the  west  of  the  hill  and  at  a 
depth  of  fifty  men. 

82-  If  of  several  ant-hills  in  a spot,  the  central  one  be 
white,  there  will  be  a current  at  the  spot  at  the  depth  of 
fi fly- five  men. 

83.  If  the  Palasa  tree  be  seen  to  grow  with  the  Sami 
trees,  there  will  be  a current  to  the  west  of  the  trees  at  the 
depth  of  sixty  men.  In  digging,  there  will  be  seen  a snake 
at  the  depth  of  half  a man  and  below  it  there  v/111  be  yellow 
soil  mixed  with  sand. 

84-  If  the  white  Rohitaka  tree  be  seen  surrounded  by 
ant-hills,  there  will  be  a current  at  the  distance  of  a cubit  to 
the  west  of  the  tree  and  at  the  depth  of  seventy  men. 

85.  If  the  Sami  be  seen  white  and  full  of  thorns,  tlicre 


54 


BEIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  7. 


will  be  a current  to  the  south  of  the  tree  at  a depth  of 
seventy-five  men.  In  digging  there  will  be  found  a snake 
at  the  depth  of  half  a man. 

86.  It  would  be  wrong  to  proceed  to  judge  of  under- 
currents in  dry  but  fertile  lands  from  the  several  indications 
given  for  arid  lauds.  As  regards  the  Jambu  and  the  Yetasa^ 
the  depths  of  undercurrents  given  for  these  trees  shall  be 
doubled  if  the  trees  are  seen  to  grow  in  arid  lands. 

87  & 88.  If  the  trees  Jambu,  Ti  ivrita,  Murva,  Sisumari, 
Sariba,  Siva,  Syama.j  Yeerudhi,  Yarahi,  J^^otishmati,  Garuda- 
vaga,  Sukarika,  Mashaparna,  Yyaghrapada  are  seen  to  grow 
by  the  side  of  snake  holes^  there  will  be  an  undercurrent  to 
the  north  of  the  holes  at  the  distance  of  three  cubits  and  at 
a depth  of  three  men  and  a half. 

89.  The  above  apply  to  purely  wet  lands.  But  if 
the  trees  are  seen  to  grow  in  dry  but  fertile  lands,  the  depth 
of  undercurrents  will  be  five  men  and  in  arid  lands  the 
depth  will  be  seven  men. 

90.  In  the  case  of  lands  in  which  neither  trees  nor 
plants  are  seen  to  grow,  in  which  no  ant-hills  are  found  to 
grow,  and  which  present  a smooth  and  even  appearauce, 
there  will  be  undercurrents  in  those  spots  where  the  appear- 
ance of  the  soil  is  of  an  unusual  nature. 

91.  For  instance,  if  the  spot  appears  wet  or  hollow  or 
sandy,  or  if  it^be  found  to  resound  to  the  tread  of  foot,  there 
will  be  a current  at  the  depth  of  four  and  a half  or  five  meu. 

92.  There  are  undercurrents  containing  an  abundant 
supply  of  water  to  the  south  of  trees  of  luxuriant  growth 
and  at  the  depth  of  four  men.  In  places  full  of  trees,  if  the 
ground  should  present  any  unusual  appearance,  the  existence 
of  the  current  may  be  determined  as  stated  above. 

93.  In  dry  but  fertile  lands  as  well  as  in  wet  lands,  if 
the  ground  be  found  to  sink  under  the  foot,  there  will  be  a 


cri.  7-] 


BRIHAT  SAMIIITA. 


current  at  the  depth  of  a man  and  a half ; and  if  while  there 
are  no  houses  in  the  neighbourhood,  worms  are  seen  in  largo 
quantities^  there  will  bo  an  undercurrent  at  the  spot. 

94.  If  the  ground  be  felt  both  hot  and  cold,  thero  will 
be  hot  and  cold  currents  at  the  spot  at  a depth  of  three  men 
and  a half;  and  if  a rainbow,  a fish  or  an  ant-hill  be  seen 
at  the  spot,  there  will  be  a current  at  the  distance  of  four 
cubits  from  them  and  at  a depth  of  three  men  and  a half. 

95.  If,  of  a nuihber  of  ant-hills  about  a spot,  one  be 
seen  above  the  rest,  there  will  be  a current  under  it,  and 
there  will  also  be  currents  in  places  where  crops  do  not  grow. 

96.  If  the  Banyan,  the  Palasa  and  the  Udumbara  trees 

bo  seen  to  grow  together,  there  will  be  a current  under 

them.  If  the  Banyan  and  the  Pippala  trees  be  seen  to 
grow  together,  there  will  be  a current  to  the  north  of  the 
trees. 

97.  If  a well  be  situated  to  the  south-east  of  a vil- 
lage or  a town,  there  will  be  much  suffering  from  various 
fears  and  from  thirst. 

98.  If  the  well  be  situated  in  the  south-western  quar- 
ter, children  will  perish.  If  in  the  north-west,  women  will 
suffer.  Wells  situated  in  the  north-east  will  conduce  to 
prosperity. 

99.  I have  thus  stated  in  the  Arya  metre,  the  views  of 
the  Sage  Saraswata  on  the  subject  of  Undercurrents.  I 
shall  now  proceed  to  stato  the  views  of  Manu  on  the  same 
subject. 

100.  Wherever  trees,  shrubs  and  creepers  are  seen  to 
grow  luxuriantly,  with  glossy  and  uninjured  leaves,  there 
are  undercurrents;  and  there  are  also  undercurrents  in 
places  where  the  Padma,  Kshura,  Usira,  Kula,  Gundra, 
Kasa,  Kusa,  and  Nalika  are  seen  to  grow. 

101  & 102.  There  are  undercurrents  in  places  where 
the  Kharjui’ti,  Jambu,  Arjuna  and  the  Vetasa  trees  are  seen 


5G 


bruiat  samhita. 


[CH.  7. 

to  grow,  or  where  there  grow  milky  trees,  shrubs  and  creep- 
ers, or  where  the  Uhatra,  Ibha,  Naga,  Satapatra,  Neepa, 
Siuclavara  and  Naktamala  trees  are  seen  to  grow.  Again, 
where  the  tree  Yibliitaka  or  Madajantika  is  seen  to  grow, 
there  will  be  a current  at  the  spot  at  a depth  of  three  men. 
If  rooks  are  found  one  over  the  other,  there  will  be  under- 
currents at  a depth  of  three  men  at  their  foot. 

103.  Where  the  earth  is  found  overgrown  with  tho 
Munji  grass,  with  reeds  and  with  the  Kusa  grass,  the  soil 
black  and  mixed  with  pebbles,  as  well  as  in  places  where  the 
soil  is  black  or  red,  there  will  be  undercurrents  containing 
a large  supply  of  sweet  water. 

104.  If  the  soil  be  red  and  mixed  with  pebbles,  the 
water  will  be  astringent  in  its  flavor,*  if  it  be  brown,  the 

ater  Avill  be  saline  ,*  if  white,  it  will  be  saltish  ; and  if 
black  it  will  be  sweet. 

105.  Wherever  the  trees  Saka,  Aswakarna,  Arjuna, 
Bilva,  Sarja,  Sreeparni,  Arishta,  Dhava,  and  Simsapa  are 
found  to  grow,  or  where  the  leaves  of  trees,  bushes  and  creep- 
ers are  found  perforated  wdth  holes,  or  where  such  trees, 
bushes  and  creepers  put  on  a forbidding  appearance,  there 
will  be  no  water  in  the  neighbourhood. 

lOo.  If  the  ground  be  seen  of  the  color  of  the  sun, 
fire,  ashes,  camel  or  ass,  there  will  be  no  water  in  the  loca- 
lity. But  if  the  bambu  be  seen  to  shoot  out,  of  a red  color, 
or  if  the  soil  be  found  red,  there  will  be  undercurrents  lying 
immediately  under  stones. 

107.  Where  there  are  found  stones  of  the  color  of 
Vydurya,  kidney~bean  or  of  the  clouds  or  of  the  color  of 
the  fruit  of  the  fig  tree  when  about  to  ripen,  or  of  the  color 
of  the  bee  or  collyrinm  or  of  brown  color,  there  will  be  water 
in  the  neighbourhood. 

108.  If  the  stone  be  of  the  color  of  the  pigeou,  of 


CH,  7.] 


BRIHAT  BAMHITA. 


57 


honey,  of  gliee,  or  of  white  silk,  cr  of  the  color  of  the  Soma 
plant,  there  will  be  an  abundant  supply  of  water  in  the 


neighbourhood, 

109.  But  if  the  stone  be  red  or  with  spots  of  various 
colors,  or  of  the  color  of  the  white  ashes  or^tlie^cameh  the 
ass  or  the  bee,  or  of  the  color  of  the  Angusbtika  flower'or 
of  the  color  of  the  sun  or  fire,  there  will  be  no  water  in  the 
neigbbourliood- 

.« 

]10.  Where  stones  are  found  of  the  color  of  the  moon- 
light or  crystal  or  pearl  or  gold,  or>f;tbe  color  of  Vermil- 
lion or  collyrium,  or  bf  the  color  of  the  rising  sun,  or  of  the 
color  of  harltala,  that  is,  snlphnret  of  arsenic,  there  would 
be  prosperity.  Tlius;have  we  stated  the  views  of  Manu  on 
the  subject  of  Undercurrents. 

111.  Stones  wliich  cannot  be  broken  and'which  con- 
duce to  prosperity,  are  dwelt  in  by  tlie  Yakshas  and  the  Na- 
gns  at  all  times.  Countries  in  which  such  stones  are  found 
will  never  suffer  from  drought. 

112.  If  stones  that  cannot  be  broken  be  heated  in  the 
fire  fed  by  the  dry  leaves  and  the  wood  of  the  Tinduka  tree 
and  then  drenched  in  lime  water,  they  can  be  easily 
broken  ; 


113.  Or  mix  the  ashes  of  the  Mokshaka  with  water 
heat  the  mixture,  add  to  it  the  juice  of  reeds  and 

drench  the  stones  seven  times  with  the  preparation,  then 
heat  the  stone  it  will  become  brittle; 

]14.  Or  mix  together  butter-milk,  boiled  rice  water 
and  arrock,  and  throw  into  the  mixture  a quantity  of  horse- 
grem  and  the  fruit  of  the  Badari,  keep  the  mixture  foi’ seven 
days  and  then  drench  the  stone  with  it  and  heat  it,  it  will 
become  brittle. 

315.  Soak  in  the  urine  of  the  cow  the  leaves  of  tho 

8 


58 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


Fch.  7, 

w 


Hiargosa  as  !hvell  as  the  sesnmum  'plant,  acd  tli©  plants 
Apamarga,  Tindiika  and  Gnduchijand  obtain  a decoction. 
After  drencliing^tbe  stone  witb  it  sis  times  heat  tbe  stones^, 
it  will  become  brittle. 

116.  Form  a mixture  of  the  juice  of  the  plant  Calotro- 
pis  gigantea^  the  black  powder  of  the  burnt  horn  of  the 
ram,  the  excrement  of  the  turtle  dove  and  of  the  rat,  rub 
this  over  the  stone  cutter’s  chistle,  stir  it  in  oil  and  then 
temper  the  instrument.  It  will  neither  break  nor  become 
blunt  when  worked  in  stone  ; 

117.  Or  mix  together^  the  juice  of  the  plantain  or 
butter  milk.  Allow  the  mixture  to  remain  so  for  a day  and 
then  temper  in  it  any  cutting  instrument  which  shall  after- 
wards be  rubbed  against  the  wet  stone.  The  instrument 
will  never  break  when  worked  in  stone  or  metals. 

118.  There  will  be  an  abundant  supply  of  water  under 
the  bank  at  the  foot  of  a mountain,  if  the  bank  Iruns  from 
east  to  west  and  not  if  it  runs  from  north  to  south.  Where 
there  may  be  streams  running  along  the  bank^  the  bank 
breaks  generally  when  the  waves  strike  aginst  it.  In  the 
absence  of  such  streams  water  shall  be  collected  by  the  side 
of  the  bank  by  means  of  dykes  constructed  of  stones  or 
wood.  The  water  shall  then  be  stirred  up  by  horses,  ele- 
phants and  other  animals,  the  waves  dashing  against  the 
bank  wdll  break  it. 

119.  Along  the  margin  of  a pond  or  other  piece  of 
water  shall  be  grown  the  Kakubha,  the  Banyan,  the  Mango, 
the  Platclia,  the  Kadamba,  the  Nichula,  the  Jambu,  the 
Vetasa,  the  Neepa^  the  Kuravaka,  the  Tala,  the  Asoka,  the 
Madhuka,  and  the  Vakula« 

120.  In  the  case  of  tanks  a sluice  or  an  outlet  for 
wmter  shall  be  erected  of  stoues  in  one  spot.  It  should  be 
capable  of  being  closed  by  means  of  thick  beam  shiitters  or 


cn.  8.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


59 


planks  tlirust  between  stones,  and  when  closed  tlie  otliev 
side  shall  be  covered  with  earth  to  prevent  the  escape  of 
water. 

1*21 . The  fragrant  plants  of  Anjana,  Mnsta  and  Useei’ca 
together  with  the  powder  of  Rajakosataka  and  Ainalaka  and 
with  the  fruit  of  the  Kataka,  shall  be  thrown  into  wells. 

122.  If  the  well  water  be  muddy^  bitter,  brackish, 
without  flavor  or  of  bad  smell,  it  will  become  clear,  sweet, 
fragrant  and  possessed  of  other  good  properties. 

123.  The  work  of  sinking  wells  shall  be  commenced 
when  the  Moon  passes  through  one  of  the  asterisras  of 
Magha,  Anuradha^  Push3^a,  Dhamishta,  U.  Phalgani,  IJ. 
Ashadha,  IJ.  Prosht^apada,  Rohini  and  Sataya. 

121.  Puja  shall  be  performed  to  God  Yarunn,  and  a 
pike  of  the  Banyan  or  Yetasa  shall  be  driven  into  the  ground 
at  the  spot  directly  over  the  current  after  due  puja  to  it 
with  flowers,  sandal  paste  and  perfumed  smoke. 

125.  I have  already  treated  of  the  subject  of  rains, 
adopting  the  views  of  Baladeva,  and  now  by  the  grace  of 
the  Munis,  I have  well  treated  of  the  subject  of  Under- 
currents. 


CHAPTER  YIII.  (55). 

On  Gardening. 

1.  The  sides  of  rivers  and  lakes  and  other  water  banks 
will  not  bo  pleasant  and  agreeable  if  devoid  of  shady  trees. 
It  is  therefore  necessary  to  form  gardens  on  the  banks  of 
waters. 

2.  Soft  soil  is  congenial  to  the  growth  of  all  trees. 
Such  a soil  should  be  selected  for  the  garden,  and  the  Sesa- 
mum  plant  should  first  be  grown  in  it.  As  soon  as  the  plant 


BRJHAT  SAMHITA. 


60 


[CH.  8. 


beg’ic  } to  bear  blossoms^  it  must  ba  cut  and  removed  from 
the  spot. 


3.  The  trees  Arishta(a),  Asoka,  Punnaga  and  Sirisha 
shall  be  grown  either  in  gardens  or  in  houses  bj  their 
seeds  and  they  will  conduce  to  prosperity. 

4 & 5.  The  trees  Panasa)  Asoka,  Plantain,  Jambu, 
Lakucha,  Dadima,  Draksha,  Palivata,  Bejapura  and  Atimuk- 
taka  shall  ba  grown  by  planting  either  their  roots  after 
clipping  them  or  their  branches,  smearing  cow-dung  over  the 
parts  cut. 

6.  Trees  that  grow  without  branches  shall  be  grown 
in  the  Sisira  season,  and  in  the  Ilemanta  shall  be  grown 
trees  that  grow  with  branches  ; in  the  winter  season  shall  be 
grown  trees  possessing  good  trunk.  The  trees  may  be 
planted  in  any  quarter  of  the  garden. 

7.  The  growing  of  trees  by  smearing  over  them  from 
the  root  to  the  branches  a mixture  of  ghee,  of  Usira,  of 
Sesamum  seeds,  of  honey,  of  Vidanga,  of  milk  and  of  cow- 
dung,  is  known  as  Sankrainana  growth* 

8.  The  person  planting  the  tree  shall  do  so  after 
bathing  and  after  washing  it  with  water  and  adorning  it 
with  sandal.  The  trees  will  then  bear  the  leaves  of  their 

parent  trees, 

9.  In  the  dry  season  the  trees  shall  be  watered  both 
in  the  morning  and  evening  j in  the  cold  season  they  shall 
bo  watered  at  mid-day,  and  in  the  rainy  season  whenever 
the  ground  is  found  dry. 

10  & 11.  The  Janibu,  the  Vetasa,  the  Vaneera,  the 
Kadamba,  the  Udumbara,  the  Arjuua,  the  Beejapuraka,,  tlie 
Mridvika,  the  LakucPa,  the  Dadina,  the  Yanjula,  the  Nakta- 


(o>) . Ariahta,  &c.  For  aa  explanation,  yido  glossary  at  th,e  end  of  this 
chapter. 


CH.  8.] 


BRIHAT  SAMIIITA* 


G1 


mala,  tlio  Tilkn,  the  Pauasa,  tlie  Timira  and  the  Amrataka 
Bhall  be  grown  on  wet  soil. 

12.  An  interval  of  twenty  cubits  between  trees  is  tlie 
best;  ono  of  sixteen  is  passable;  and  one  ^ of  twelve  is 
injurious. 

13.  The  trees  that  are  planted  veiy  near  each  other 
get  their  branches  interwoven  as  well  as  their  roots  and 
such  trees  get  choked'  and  do  not  grow  well. 

14.  Cold  winds  and  hot  sun  produce  diseases  in  ti’eeSj 
and  the  trees  turn  white  and  do  not  put  forth  new  leaves  ; 
the  branches  become:;dry  and  the  juice  oozes  out. 

15.  To  cure  thed^’e©  diseases,  first  scrape  off 

or  otherwise  remove  the  parts  dead  from  the  tree  with  a 
knife  ; rub  over  the  pai  ts  a mixture  of  Yidangn,  ghee  aud 
mire  and  pour  at  the  roots  water  mixed  witli  milk. 

10.  If  the  fruits  are  seen  to  die  out,  then  heat  a mix- 
ture of  horse  gram,  black  gram  and  Mudga  (kidney  bean), 
sesamum  seeds  and  barley ; after  the  mixture  has  fully 
cooled  pour  it  at  the  roots.  Then  the  trees  will  yield  an 
increase  of  flowers  and  fi  nits. 

17  & 18.  Get]  two  adhakas  (a)  of  the  excrement  of 
the  goat  aud  the  ram,  an  adhaka  of  Sesamum  seed,  half  an 
adhaka  of  saktu(6),  an  adhaka  of  water  and  a tula  (c)  ofjcow’s 
flesh.  Form  a mixture  of  these,  keep  it  untouched  for  seven 
days,  and  if  at  the  end  of  the  time  spreading  creepers, 
plants  and  trees  be  watered  with  the  mixture,  flowers  and 
fruits  will  grow  in  abundance- 

19  & 20,  Keep  the  seeds  soaked  in  milk  for  ten  days  ; 
then  rubbing  ghee  over  the  hands  the  seed  shall  bo  taken 
up  in  the  hands  and  passed  from  hand  to  hand  till  it  is 


fa).  Adhaka  is  two  Madras  measures. 

fhj.  Saktu,  the  Hour  of  barley  or  rice  fried  and  groun 

(c),  Tula.  Ono  hundred  palaa. 


62 


BRIHAT  SAMIIITA. 


[CH.  7. 


covered  with  ghee.  It  shall  then  be  rubbed  over  several 
titnes  with  cow-dung  and  exposed  to  the  smoke  of  the  flesh 
of  the  hog  and  the  deer.  It  shall  then  be  mixed  with  the 
scrum  or  marrow  (of  the  flesh)  of  the  fish  and  the  pig,  and 
when  dry  it  shall  be  sown  in  a well  prepared  soil  and  watered 
with  a mixture  of  milk  and  water.  When  it  grows,  it  will 

grow  with  flowers. 

2 1.  Mix  together  the  flour  of  rice,  of  black  gram  and  of 
Sesanium  seeds  with  the  flour  of  barley  (fried  before  ground) 
with  the  dead  or  deca3md  flesh,  and  with  a small  quantity  of 
water  ; soak  the  seed  of  the  tamarind  in  the  mixture  and 
expose  it  to  the  smoke  of  the  root  of  the  turmeric.  The 
seed  when  sown  will  grow  as  a creeper. 

22  & 2.3.  Put  into  the  milk  of  the  cow  the  roots  of 

Asphota,  Dhatri,  Dhaa,  Vasika,  Palasini,  Yetasa,  Sury- 

avalli,  Syarna  and  Atimukta  and  heat  the  milk  on  fire ; 

after  it  has  cooled,  put  into  it  the  seed  of  the  Kapittha  and 

allow  it  to  soak  for  100  ghatikas  (a)  and  dry  the  seed  in 

the  sun  for  30  days.  If  the  seed  be  then  sown  in  the  soil 
it  will  grow  as  a creeper. 

24 , 25  & 2 6.  Dig  a pit  in  the  ground  a cubit  square 
aud  two  cubits  deep,  and  fill  it  with  water  prepared  with  a 
mixture  of  the  flesh  of  the  fish.  Allow  the  pit  to  dry  up 
completel}^;  dry  it  further  by  means  of  fire  ; rub  the  sides 
and  bottom  with  a mixture  of  honey,  ghee  and  ashes,  fill  the 
pit  now  with  the  flour  of  black  gram,  of  tSesamum  seeds  and 
of  barley  mixed  with  earth  ; pour  over  the  pit  water  pre- 
pared with  the  flesh  of  the  fish  and  pound  the  mixture  well 
till  it  becomes  hard.  Sow  any  seed  at  a depth  of  four 
inches  and  water  it  with  the  water  of  the  fish.  The  seed  will 
grow  as  a fine  creeper  with  tender  leaves  over  terraces  and 
the  roof  of  houses  in  a most  wonderful  manner. 


f(?. ) . A ghafcika  is  2.4  minutes. 


cu.  8.J 


BRinAT  SAMHITA. 


C3 


27  & 28.  Soak  any  seed  one  Imndred  times  either  in 
the  Kalka  (decoctiou)  or  in  the  oil  of  Ankola,  or  in  the  fruit 
of  tlie  Sleshmataka.  The  moment  the  seed  is  put  into  the 
ground  it  grows  with  bi-anches  laden  with  fruits*  What 
wonder  ! 

20  & SO.  Soak  any  seed  in  the  fruit  of  the  Sleshmataka 
after  removing  its  seeds^  and  then  soak  it  in  the  water  ySmu 
of  the  ripe  fruit  of  Ankoja  and  dry  it  in  shade  ; repeat  the 
opei’ation  seven  times  ; mb  the  seed  over  with  the  dung  of 
the  buffalo j and  keep  it  buried  in  the  same  dung  for  sorno 
time;  then  sow  it  in  the  soil  drenched  with  the  waters  of 
the  cocoanut.  d’he  seed  will  grow  and  bear  fruits  in  a day% 

31.  When  the  MoOn  passes  through  any  of  the  fixed, a) 
asterisms  or  the  soft(^)  asterisrns,  or  through  the  asterisms 
of  Moola^  Vibakha^  Jhishya^  Sravana^  Asvini  and  Hasta, 
ti-ees  shall  be  planted  or  seeds  sown  according  to  the  views 
of  Sages  possessed  of  the  inner  eye  of  knoivledg’e. 

Notes. — The  following  have  been  extracted  from  a 
W’ork  known  as  Briliat  Sarngadhara. 

1.  Mix  with  earth  a variety  of  fragrant  flowers  ; us© 
tho  mixture  as  inauure  to  a tree  of  scentless  flowers;  pour 
at  the  roots  the  juice  of  Dhava  and  Khadira;  smear  over 
the  tree  sandal  paste^  and  expose  the  tree  to  the  smoke  of 
ghee;  its  scentless  flowers  will  become  fagraiit. 

2.  Use  as  manure  to  the  roots  of  the  cotton  the  leaves 
of  barley,  Sesainurn  and  oi^  turmerio,  and  pour  at  the  roots 
■water  pi  epared  with  a mixture  of  these  leaves.  The  plant 
will  yield  cotton  throughout  the  year  bright  and  red  as  fire. 

3.  Mix  with  water  the  juice  of  the  sugarcane  and  the  root 

(a)  The  fixed  asterisms  are  Echini^  U.  Phalguiii,  U,  Ashadu  ai.d  U, 
I’roshtapada. 

The  soft  asrerisms  are  Mrigasirsha,  Chitra,  Ann  rad  ha  and  Eevati, 


64 


BRTHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  8* 


of  fcbe  Vidarl  ; lieafc  the  mixture  and  rub  it  over  the  roots  of 
an}^  flowering  tree,  and  pour  at  the  roots  the  juice  of  the 
sugarcane.  The  trees  will  yield  flowers  at  unusual  seasons. 

4.  Make  c ikos  of  a mixture  of  Madhuj^ashti,  sugar^ 
koslita  and  Madhupuslipa,  and  cover  with  the  cakes  the  roots 
of  fruit  trees  and  throw  earth  over  the  parts-  The  fruits  will 
grow  without  bones. 

5.  Kill  a goat  and  immediately  tie  its  shoulder  skin 
over  the  branches  of  fruit  trees.  The  fruits  will  ever  remain 
unripe. 

6.  Pound  in  a stone  mortar  the  bone  of  the  monkey 
mixed  with  the  juice  of  the  elephant  in  rub;  rub  the  pie- 
paration  over  the  roots  of  fruit  trees.  The  fruits  will  re- 
main unripe  for  a year. 

7.  Tie  over  the  branches  of  fruit  trees  the  skin  of  an 
animal  and  grass  ; rub  over  the  branches  a mixture  of  Vi- 
danga,  honey  and  milk ; pour  at  the  roots  a mixture  of 
milk  and  water.  The  ripe  fruits  will  stick  to  the  tree  for 
a very  long  time. 

8.  Mix  with  milk  the  serum  or  marrow  (of  flesh)  of  tlie 
fish  and  the  hog  as  well  as  the  flesh  of  the  two  creatures. 
Soak  any  seed  in  the  mixture  ; dry  it  and  expose  it  to  the 
smoke  of  ghee.  The  seed  when  sown  will  grow  in  an  un- 
usual and  w'onderful  manner. 

9.  If  the  seed  of  the  pomegranate  be  soaked  in  the 
blood  of  the  cock  21  times  dried  and  each  time,  it  will,  the 
moment  it  is  put  into  the  ground,  grow  and  bear  fruits  in  a 
most  wonderful  manner. 

10.  Thrust  into  the  root  of  the  Knmnda  (the  esculent 
white  water  lily)  a variety  of  colors,  soak  the  root  in  urine, 
rub  over  it  ghee  and  honey,  and  tlien  sow  it  in  the  soil,  it 


brihat  samhita* 


65 


cii  8.] 


will  grow  and  bear  flowers  of  the  several  colors  oiigiually 
put  into  the  root. 

11.  Mix  together  the  buffalo’s  dung  and  urine,  rub 
the  mixture  over  the  seed  of  the  fruit  of  the  Kurauda  for 
seven  da37s  drying  the  seed  each  time.  If  the  seed  bo 
then  sown  into  the  ground,  it  will  grow  as  a Karavira  plant. 

12.  Soak  the  seed -of  the  pumpkin  or  of  the  brinjal, 
or  of  the  serpent  cucumber  and  the  like  in  the  serum  or 
marrow  (of  flesh)  of  tlie  fish  or  hog  and  dry  the  seed.  If 
the  seed  be  then  sown  in  good  soil  and  watered  it  will 
bear  fruits  of  very  large  size  and  without  bones. 

13.  Soak  the  seed  of  the  Castor  oil  plant  in  the  blood 
and  serum  (of  flesh)  of.  the  hog  and  dry  it  j soak  it  again  in 
the  oil  of  the  Ankola  and  dry  it.  If  the  seed  be  now  sown 
in  the  soil,  it  will  grow  and  bear  the  fruits  of  Kaiavalli. 

14.  Use  as  manure  to  the  root  of  the  plantain  the 
excrement  of  the  ass  and  the  horse  ; burn  dry  twigs  over 
the  root;  the  plantain  will  then  yield  fruits  as  big  as 
the  trunk  of  the  elephant,  and  the  fruits  will  appear  as  if 
to  tear  out  the  tree. 

15.  If  the  root  of  the  plantain  be  drenched  with  the 
blood  or  serum  (of  flesh,)  of  the  hog  or  with  the  decoction  of 
the  fruit  of  the  Ankola,  it  will  bear  pomegranate  fruits. 

16.  If  the  Rambha  (plantain)  be  watered  with  a li- 
quid mixture  consisting  of  the  flesh,  serum  and  blood  of 
man  and  the  powdered  tooth  of  the  elephant  and  water, 
the  tree  will  yield  mango  fruits. 

17.  Mix  together  the  shining  decoction  of  the  fi'uits 
of  Ankola,  human  flesh,  the  milk  of  the  goat  and  oil  cakes. 
Use  the  mixture  as  manure  to  the  seed  of  the  mango  put 
into  the  soil.  The  seed  will  grow  out  as  a spreading  creep- 
er like  the  vine  and  will  bear  fruits  at  all  times. 


0 


6G 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  8. 


18.  Form  a mixture  of  Krimiripu,  of  barley,  of  Ma- 
Gliuyashti  and  of  jaggery ; rub  it  over  any  tree  yielding 
bitter  fruit,  after  slightly  grazing  out  the  bark  with  a 
knife,  pour  at  the  root  a mixture  of  [milk  and  water  ; the 
tree  will  thenceforth  yield  sweet  fruits. 

19.  Soak  any  seed  many  times  in  human  fiosh  and 
in  the  oil  of  the  Ankola,  drying  the  seed  each  time.  Take 
a quantity  of  earth  in  the  hand^  bury  the  seed  in  it  and 
pour  water  over  it ; the  seed  will  grow  that  instant. 

20.  Dig  a pit,  burn  in  it  the  bones  and  the  dung  of 
the  cow  and  the  hog  remove  the  ashes  ,*  fill  the  pit  with 
earth.  Plant  in  it  the  root  of  the  Moolaka , the  root 
will  grow  to  the  size  of  the  pit. 


Glossary  of  Botanical  terms  occurring  in  the  last  hvo 
Chapters^  arranged  alphaheiically. 


A. 

Amalaka— -The  fruit  of  the  Emblic  myrobalan. 

Amra — The  Mango,  inninnih. 

Amrataka — Hog-plum.  Spondias  mangifera.  ^nLL^mir.  Teh. 
Adivie  mamadie,  Amatum  ; Beng.  Amna. 

Anjana — probably  Kalanjana — a small  shrub  used  as  a pur-- 
gative. 

Ankola — Alangium  hexapetalum.  Tel.  Woodooga 

Hind.  Akola.  The  roots  are  aromatic  the  fruit  is  edi- 
ble, 

Apamarga — Name  of  a plant.  Achyranthes  aspera  employ^ 
ed  often  in  incantations,  in  medicine,  in  washing  linen 
and  in  sacrifices.  /5friLj(^<3S!. 


cn.  8.]  brihat  samhita.  €7 

Arislita — The  soap  berry  tree ; Sapindus  detergens ; Aza^ 
dirachta  Indica.  Qsijuuldiild  or 

Arjuna — The  tree  Terminalia  Ai  juna.  wQ^^Loin^, 

Arka — Name  of  the  plant  Calotropis  gigantea. 

Asmantaka — Name  of  a plant  from  the  fibres  of  which  a 
Brahmin’s  girdle  may  be  made;  probably  Indian  hemp 

£FGSSI&), 

Asoka — Name  of  the  tree  Jonesia  Asoka- 
Aspota — Calatropis  gigantea.  6T(3<^@. 

Aswakarna — The  tree  Vatica  robusta*  LoniTLDnQLn^^/D 

LDJTLD.  ^ 

V 

Atibala — Name  of  a ■ medicinal^’  plants  Sidonia  cordifolia 
and  Rhombifolia  or  Aniiona  squarmosa.  Custard  apple. 

Atimukta — Name  of  a tree  Dalbergia  Ougeinensis.  (S0<i 


B. 

Badari — The  Jujube  tree,  Zjzyphus  jujuba.  Tel. 

Reygoo;  Beng  Kook  Flowers  greenish,  yellow  and  fruit 
eatable.  It  is  sweet  and  mealy. 

Beejapura — A variety  of  citron.  @d)aDLlgL£Z)/rj[/^fr. 

Bhallata — Markingnut  plant.  CD^fsiQ<sBrrLl.es)L-. 

Bharngi — Q<s€kr(Burr!iiEjQ. 

Bilva — .iEgle  marmelos,  the  Bell  tree  or  the  Wood-apple.  Its 
leaves  are  employed  in  the  ceremonial  of  the  worship 
of  Siva.  eSevQjLDirih.  Tel.  Maredoo;  Beng.  Bell. 

C. 

Chatra — Name  of  a kind  of  grass.  Name  of  a plant,  Ani- 
thum  sowa.  Tel.  Sompa. 

D. 

Badima — Pomegranate.  Lo/r^Ssrr. 

> 

Danti — The  plant  Croton  polyandium  Tel.  Konda* 


68 


Bkihat  samhita.  [ch.  S, 

Aniadum  ; Beng.  Dantee ; Hind.  Hiikoose.  The  seeds 
ai-e  used  a purgative. 

Dhatri — Eniblica  officinalis.  Q/e^is^lduld. 

Dhava — The  plant  Grislea  tomentosa.  Tel-  Sirinjie  ; Beng. 
Dhaee-phool.  Q<s^^Q(s:u6^  ? 

Draksha — Vine. 

G. 

Gariida vega— Name  of  a plant. 

Gudnchi — The  shrub  Cocculus  cordifolius.  ^/E^aQsrrL^.TAo 
Tippatingay;  Beng.  Guluncha.  This  is  a twining  shrub. 

Gundra — A kind  of  grass.  Saccharum  Sara,  pen-reed  grass. 
QsuefTfrisaLfi,  Beng.  Shur  or  Saro. 

H. 

Haridra — Turmeric. 

I. 

Ibha — Probably  Ibhakesara.  The  tree  Mesua  Roxburgh!  i 
or  Ibhakana.  The  plant  Scindapsus  officinalis, 
iSleQ, 

IndratarU” — The  tree  Pinus  Devataru.  Q<3^LbL^6Sff=m&=LDrril). 

J. 

Jambu — Syz3^gium  Jambol  Janum.  Tel.  Nareddoo  ; 

Hind.  Jamoon.  The  fruit  is  eatable.  Flowers  small, 
wdiite. 

Jyotishmati — Heart  pea.  Cardispermum  helicacabum.  ojfr 

K. 

Kadamba — The  tree  Nauclea  Kadamba.  Flowers  small, 
organe  colored  and  fragrant.  Tel.  Ru- 

draksbakamba  Beng.  Kudum  ; Hind.  Cuddum. 

Kakodumbarika — Opposite  leaved  fig  tree.  Ficus  oppositi- 
folia. 

Kakubha — The  tree  Terminalia  Arjuna. 


Cll.  8.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA: 


Kampilla — Crinum  amaryllacea.  or 

Kantakarika — Solaniim  Jacquiiii.  Tel.  Yaii- 

kula;  Hind.  Kootaya- 

Kapittha — TlieEleplianfcor  Wood  apple.  Feronia  elepliantura, 
eSenirLDnih.  Tel.  Velacra  ; Hind.  Kiioet.  The  fruit  is  eaten. 

Karanja — Pongamia  glabra.  L-jrBSLorjth.Te].  Kanooyoo  ; Hind. 
Kurung  ; Berig.  Kurunjee*  Le  ives  unequally’  pinnated. 

Karavalli — Alomordica  cliarantia-  unspsToj.  Beng.  Kurula. 
Karavira — The  plant  Assafoetida. 

Karira — A cluster  of  shooting  bamboos. 

Karnikai’a — The  treq  Pcerospermum  acerifolium.  Also 
Cassia  fistula,  Q<sfrr^(^. 

Kasa — A species  of  grass.  Saccharum  spontaneum.  fBnemio. 
Beng.  Kash ; Hind.  K-jgara  ; Tel.  Relloogaddy. 

Kataka — The  clearing  nut  plant.  Strychnos  potatorum. 

Qpp^iTisQ<sfrLL&DL^. 

Khadira — The  tree  Acacia  catechu.  Having  very  hard  wood. 

Tamil.  Wothalay;  Tel.  Podeelmaun  ,*  Beng.  Khuera. 
Khai  juri — The  Wild  Datura  tree.  Qufr’^&^LDULh. 

Kovidara — Bauhinia  variegata.  Hind.  Sona.  The 

buds  are  eaten  as  vegetables. 

Krimiripu — An  anthelmintic  plant.  Vidanga,  a shrub  used 
in  medicine  as  a vermifuge. 

Kshura — Tribulus  Lanuginosus.  Tel.  Palleroo;  Beng. 

Gokhoor. 

Kula — Name  of  several  plants  ; a kind  of  ebony.  Disopyros 
tomentosa.  Hind.  Tumal. 

Kuranka — A crimson  species  of  Amaranth. 

Kusa — Sacred  grass  used  at  certain  religious  ceremonies, 
Poa  Synosuroides.  A grass  with  long  stalks  and  nume- 
rous pointed  loaves. 


L. 


BLUE  AT  SAMEITA. 


70 

Lakshumana — Name  of  various  plants.  Oshadi,  Prinsiparui 
&c. 

Likuclia — A kind  of  bread  fi  uit  tree.  Arthocarpus  Laouclia 

<3S  L^([  63)  iT, 


M- 

Madayantika— ^Arabian  jasmine. 

Madhuka — Bassia  longiEoUa  or  laiifolia.  ^^u&du.  Tel. 

Ippa;  Hind.  Mohe.  Its  oil  is  used  by  the  poorer  classes. 
Madhupushpa — Mahwah  tree.  Bassia  latifolia.  <sitlL(B 
ciou.  Tel.  Ipie  ; Beiig^  Maliwah  or  Aluhova- 
M ad  h u y ash  ti — S u gar  c h n e. 

Masbaparna — A and  of  leguminous  sbrnb.  Glycine  debilis* 
Moksbaka— A species  of  tree.  s,[jlL(Buu(i^^^3^Q3^u^. 
Monnjaka— A blade  of  Miiiija  grass,  Saccbaruiu  munja. 

^ULjed. 

Alridvika- — A vine,  a bunch  of  grapes,  jn-tLs^ mo itud. 

Mulaka — An  esculent  root,*  a radish,  /mQ. 

Murva — Sanseviera  Roxburghiana.  Qu(T^rssQ^Lh<oS)U.  A sort 
of  creeper  from  the  fibres  of  which  bow  strings  and 
the  girdle  of  the  Kshatriyas  are  made. 

Musta — A species  of  grass.  Cyperus  rotundas. 


N. 


Naga— Rottlera  tinctoria.  Tel.  Vasuntagunda;  Hind.  Camub 

<SLSleoQufn^, 

Naktamala — The  tree  Pongamia  glabra  or  Dalbergia  arbo- 


rea. 

Nala — A kind  of  fragrant  substance  ,*  a perfume  ,”  red  arse^ 
nic. 

Navamalika— Arabian  Jasmine.  Jasminum  sambal. 


CH.  8.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


71 


Q or  QarTL^LD^sQ.  Tel.  Boondoo  Mall  ; Beng.  Balmoo 
grab. 

Neepa — The  tree  Nauclea  cadamba-  Tel.  Budrak- 

sbakarnba. 

ITicliLila — 'J'be  tree  Barringtonia  acntaiigula.  /§’/f<i<sL_/-DLy, 
Nimba — Azadii-aclita  Indica.  QsulIl^. 

Nirgundi — Vitex  neguado.  Tel.  Wagala  ; Hiud. 

Nisinda. 

Nyo  grodha — The  Indian  fig  tree.  Ficus  Indica.  ^eoLouLh. 

O. 

Oosira — The  fragrant  root  of  the  plant  Andropogon  inurica- 

tus.  <sSl(snfrLSl&=a=LDQ^it. 

P, 

r 

Padma — A species  of  fragrant  plant.  ^/TLcsn^r.  Tel.  Yerrata-* 
mar  ay. 

Palasa — The  tree  Butea  frondosa.  Tel.  Moduga  ; Hind, 
Palas;  Eng.  Bastard  teak.  Blossoms  rich,  scarlet  color. 
Palasini — A species  of  climbing  plant. 

Palivata — Name  of  a tree. 

l^anasa — The  jack  tree.  Artocarpus  integrifolia.  umir^ 
Parushaka — Xylocarpus  granatum-  Beng.  Parusha. 

Peelu — Salvadora  Persica.  TeL  Ghoonia 
Pindara — A species  of  tree.  Fiacourtia  sapida.  Tamil,  Sot- 
tael  a ; Tel.  Conrevv. 

Plnksha — The  holy  fig  tree.  Ficus  religiosa.  &&)QGon€^LLnLQ, 
Punnaga — Rottleria  tinctoria,  from  the  blossoms  of  which 
a yellowish  dye  is  prepared, 

P. 

Hajakosataka—A  kind  of  fruit. 

Rambha — A plantain,  Masa  sapiontum, 

S. 

Saka— Pot  herb.  Sirisha  tree. 


[CH.  8* 


72  BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 

Sami— Acacia  sum  a,  possessing  a very  tough  and  hard 
wood  surposed  to  contain  fire.  ^veoi&sf^LonLo. 

Saptaparna— The  tree  Alstonia  or  Echites  scholaris.  50 
feet.  Flowers  greenish  white-  Planks  used  as  school 
boards,  ei^idsduun"^.  Beng.  Chatim. 

Sari  ha — /E6or(^(flQ<siiiT.  Sarsapai'illa. 

— The  sal  tree.  Shorea  robusta. 

Satapatra — Lotus.  Nelumbiurn  speciosum.  ^fTLceoj, 

Simsapa — The  tree  Dalbergia  Sisu.  ^Qs^ir&LDnih. 

Sinduvara — 'I'he  small  tree  or  shrub  Negundo. 

Sirisha— Sirissa  tree.  Acacia  speciosa.  Flowers  small,  white 
and  fragrant.  evneDs.  Tel.  Dirisana  ; Beng.  Sirissa. 

Sisuniari — The  plant  Nauclea  cordifolia.  LD@6P6Tr<$<_Lbq  ? 

Siva — The  Sami  tree.  Yellow  Myrobolan. 

Somalata — The  moon  plant.  Sarcostema  viminalis. 

Sonaka — Bignonia  or  Calosanthes  Indica.  A handsome 
looking  tree.  The  timber  is  soft  and  spongy.  Young 
leaves  are  used  in  the  treatment  of  ulcers.  ih. 

Tel.  Pampena  j Hind.  Shyona. 

Sreeparni — A lotus  or  the  tree  Premna  spinosa.  The  wood 
of  which  produces  fire  by  attrition. 

Tel.  Tagoomooda. 

Suknrnpadee — Sukara  is  a sort  of  moss.  Lycopodium  imbri- 
c;itum. 

Sukarika — A soi't  of  moss.  Do. 

Suriavalli — Cleome  pentaphyllas^  whiehj  according  to  Jaf- 
frey,  is  Gynandropsis.  Q(Sii^d^siT>n, 

Suvarna — The  tree  Cassia  fistula.  The  thorn  apple.  itfTsQ& 

ntai]  LD. 

S}  aina — Ichnocarpus  frutescens,  used  as  a substitute  for 
Sarsaparilla. 

T. 

Tala—The  #palmyra  or  fau  palm.  Borassus  flabdliformis; 


CH.  8.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


udosr.  Tel.  Tady  ; Hind.  Talgaclih-  Liquor  called  toddy 
is  extracted  from  tlie  tree. 

Tilaka— The  red  wood  tree.  Adenanthera  Pavonina.  lo(^^/7- 
or  fB LDesS . Tel.  Bandigooroo  vindza  ; 

Hind.  Koochunduna. 

Timira— A sort  of  aquatic  plant. 

Tinduka — Dyospyros  embryopteris  or  Dyospyros  glutinosa. 
Trivrita — A creeping  medicinal  plant ; a substitute  for 
jalap, 

V. 

Udumbara — Ficus  racemosa.  Tel.  Ma3'di  ; Hind. 

Gooler.  Red  wooded  fig  tree  or  country  fig  tree.  The 
fruit  is  edible.  " 

Usira — The  fragrant  root  of  the  plant  Andropogon  murica- 
tus.  Q(SiJiLu^Q<sua.  Tel.  Cassavoo  ; Beng.  Khuskus. 

Y. 

Yakula — A kind  of  tree.  Mimusop  elengi.  ldQioldu'^. 

Yanira — A sort  of  cane  or  ratang.  Calamus  rotang.  €u^9l. 
Yanjula— Jonesia  Asoka.  sj^s^frsujirLD  or 
Yarahi — A particular  kind  of  bulbous  plant  said  to  be  an 
esculent  root  or  yam.  u€m€SQLDL-.iB^&QDir. 

Yaruna — Evasia  longifolia.  QfBLLt^eQfsetD^. 

Yasika — Adhatoda  vasika.  ^i—irQ^rroDL — 

Yata — The  banyan  or  Indian  fig  tree.  Ficus  Indica.  ^eoinjTLD. 
Yeerana — A fragrant  grass.  Cuscus  grass.  ^m!TLBs^e!s>s^.  Tel. 
Cooroovayroo  or  Kussavoo  3 Beng.  Khuskus  ; Hind. 
Useer.  The  root  is  fragrant. 

Yetasa — Calamus  rotang.  Rattan  cane.  Tel.  Bettam  ; 

Hind.  Beta.  Sometimes  the  growth  is  to  the  length  of 
500  or  COO  feet. 

Yibhitaka — -The  tree  Terminalia  Belerica.  ^iT<s^&<sBfTLLjLnirLh, 
Tel.  Taondee  or  Tady ; Bong.  Bahura.  Length  100 
feet.  A medicinal  tree. 


10 


74 


BEiriAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  9. 


Vidanga — Erjxibe  pnuiculaia.  A modicliml  substance  consi- 
dered of  great  efficacy  as  a verlnif^g'^ 

Vidari — The  plant  Hed3’sarum  gangeticum.  The  climbing 
plant  Tpomoea  paniculata. 

Virudlii — A spreading  creeper. 

Yyaghrapada' — The  plant  Fiacourtia  sapida. 


CHAPTER  IX.  (56.) 

On  the  Building  op  Temples. 

].  After  procuring  an  abundant  supply  of  water,  and 
forming  gardens  round  iC  there  shall  be  erected  on  the  spot 
temples  for  Devas  for  the  increase  of  one’s  fame  and  virtue. 

2.  The  person  who  desires  to  go  to  worlds  to  which 
go  persons  who  perform  saci-ificial  fire  ceremonies  and  dig 
water  tanks,  shall  erect  temples  for  the  Devas.  He  prospers 
both  in  this  world  and  in  the  world  above. 

3'  Places  where  there  are  waters  and  gardens,  whe- 
ther natural  or  artificial,  are  dwelt  b}^  the  Devas. 

4.  The  Devas  are  ever  at  play  in  tanks  made  shady 
by  the  leaves  of  the  lotus  and  white  by  the  water-lilies 
moved  to  and  fro  by  the  wings  of  the  swan  ; 

5.  In  tanks  rendered  agreeable  by  the  music  of  the 
swan,  the  duck,  the  curlew  and  the  ruddy-goose  and  by  the 
water  animals,  resting  in  the  shade  of  the  hijjal  growing  on 
the  banks  ; 

6.  In  places  where  there  are  rivers  adorned  by  lines 

« 

of  curlew  birds  serving  as  a girdle  with  beads,  full  of  the 
sweet  music  of  the  teal  with  the  watery  sheet  for  robes  and 
Avith  the  ilisha  fish  for  belts  ; 

7.  In  places  where  there  are  rivers  with  blossomed 
trees  on  their  banks  for  their  head  ornaments,  with  the 
junction  of  the  streams  as  their  loins,  the  sandbanks  as 


CJi.  9.] 


BRIIIAT  SAMUITA. 


i o 

tlioir  breasts  aucl  with  the  soundiuc:;  swans  as  tlioir  anklo 
beads  3 

8.  And  in  gardens^  streams,  places  through  which 
pass  mountaiu  currents  and  in  the  canals  of  flower  gardens. 

9.  PI  aces  which  have  been  described  as  suitable  for 
the  erection  of  houses  for  the  Brahmins  and  others  are  also 
suitable  for  the  erection  of  temples. 

10.  In  the  case  of  temples  the  site  shall  always  bo 
divided  into  61  squares  and  the  entrance  shall  be  in  the  mid- 
dle of  the  wall  and  the  walls  shall  be  due  east  and  west 
and  due  north  and  south. 

11.  The  height  of  the  temple  shall  be  twice  its  breadth 
and  its  kati  shall  be  a third  of  its  heii^ht. 

OmJ 

12.  The  Garbhagraha  or  the  inner  apartment  shall  be 
half  as  broad  as  the  breadth  of  the  temple  and  walls  shall  be 
raised  all  round.  The  breadth  of  the  entrance  to  the  Gar- 
bhagraha shall  be  a fourth  of  the  breadth  of  the  room  and 
its  height  shall  be  twice  the  breadth. 

13.  The  breadth  of  tho  two  vertical  side  frames  as 
well  as  of  the  two  horizontal  frames  above  and  below  shall 
be  a fourth  of  tho  height  of  the  entrance,  and  the  thickness 
of  the  vertical  frames  shall  be  a fourth  of  the  breadth  of  tho 
entrance. 

14.  The  number  of  vertical  frames  of  the  door  of  the 
entrance  may  be  3,  6,  7 or  9,  and  two  small  openings  shall 
be  made  at  one-fourth  of  the  height  of  the  door  from  below. 

15.  The  other  parts  shall  be  adorned  wdtli  the  figures 
of  birdsj  trees  and  pots^  and  with  male  and  female  figures 
as  well  as  those  of  leaves,  creepers  and  of  the  fiends  attend- 
ing on  Siva. 

16.  The  height  of  the  image  of  the  Deva  with  its 


BRItlAT  SAMHITA. 


76 


[CH.  9. 


pedestal  shall  be  |ths  of  the  height  of  the  entrance.  The 
image  shall  be  double  the  height  of  the  pedestal. 

17  & 18.  Twenty  different  sorts  of  temples  are  re- 
ferred to  by  writers.  These  are  Meru,  Mandara,  Kailasa, 
Vimana-Chhandaj  Nandana,  Samudga,,  Padma,  Garuda, 
Nandi vardhana;,  Ktmjaru,  Guharaja,  Vrisha,  Hamsa^  Sarva- 
tobhadra,  Ghata,  Simha^  Yritta,  Chatushkona,  Shodasasree 
and  Ashtasree. 

19.  I shall  now  proceed  to  describe  each  of  the  twenty 
sorts  of  temples. 

20.  The  building  known  as  Meru  consists  of  six  sides, 
twelve  stories  with  numerous  caves  and  with  four  entrances 
and  shall  be  thirty-two  cubits  long, 

21.  The  building  known  as  Mandara  is  thirty  cubits 
broad  and  consists  of  ten  stories  with  pinnacles.  The  build- 
ing known  as  Kailasa  is  twenty  cubits  long  and  consists  of 
eight  stories  with  pinnacles. 

22.  Vimana  is  twenty-one  cubits  long  with  windows 
and  air  holes.  Nandana  has  six  stories,  is  thirty-two  cubits 
long  and  has  sixteen  Andas  (domes  ?). 

23.  Samudga  is  round  ; Padma  is  of  the  shape  of  a 
lotus,  8 cubits  long  with  a single  story  and  pinnacle. 

24.  Garuda  is  of  the  shape  of  the  Bralimany  kite  ; 
Nandivardhana  is  24  cubits  broad  with  seven  stories  and 
twenty  Andas, 

25.  Kunjara  is  of  the  shape  of  the  back  of  the  ele- 
phant with  four  sides,  each  16  cubits  broad.  Guharaja  is 
16  cubits  long  and  has  3 stories  with  verandas. 

2G.  Vrisha  is  12  cubits  broad,  round  on  all  sides  with  a 
single  story  and  pinnacle.  Hamsa  is  of  the  shape  of  the 
swan.  Ghata  is  8 cubits  broad  and  is  of  the  shape  of  a pot. 

27.  Sarvatobhadra  has  four  entrances  with  numerous 


CII.  10.]  r.PJIIAT  SAMIIITA.  77 

pinnacles  and  with  apartments  in  upper  stories  ; it  consists 
of  0 stories  and  is  26  cubits  broad. 

28.  Simha  is  twelve-sided  and  8 cubits  broad  contain- 
ing the  figure  of  the  lion.  The  four  remaining  structures 
are  of  black  color  ; of  these  four,  Chaturasra  has  5 Andas. 

29.  The  height  of  a story  shall  be  108  inches  and  3^ 
cubits  according  to  what  was  stated  by  Viswakarma  to 
Maya. 

30.  In  the  opinion  of  persons  learned  in  the  science  of 
temple  buildings  a temple  furnished  with  pigeon  holes  is 
deemed  perfect  though  it  might  contain  defects. 

31.  In  this  Cluipter,  I have  briefly  described  all  that 
has  been  stated  by  Gfarga,  and  my  attempt  has  also  been 
to  summarize  the  wide  accounts  given  by  Manu  and  other 
Eishis  on  the  subject  of  Temple  Building. 

CHAPTER  X.  (57.) 

Ox  Dcjrable  Cements. 

1 & 2.  Put  into  a drona  of  water  the  raw  leaves  of 
the  Tinduka  and  of  the  Kapitha,  the  flowers  of  the  Salmali;, 
the  seeds  of  the  Sallaki  (a),  the  bark  of  the  Dhanvana  (5), 
and  a small  quantity  of  Vacha ; heat  the  water  on  fire  till  it 
is  reduced  to  one-eighth  of  its  original  quantity.  Remove 
the  jar  from  fire, 

3.  Put  into  the  kalka  thus  prepared  Gulgulu(c)  and 
the  juice  of  the  Sreevasakafc?)  and  of  Saija  and  Bhallata, 
Kunduruka(e)  and  the  fruit  of  the  Atasi  and  of  Bilva, 
The  cement  thus  formed  is  known  as  Vajralepa. 

4.  In  the  construction  of  temples  and  of  the  palaces  of 

(a) .  Sallaki  ; The  Grum  olibanum  tree,  Bosweilia  Thurifera.  Becg 

Salai,  Hind.  Lnban.  ^’hsrenem-isSi . 

(b) .  Dhanvana  : The  plant  Alhagi  Maurorum.  Eng.  Hebrew  Manna, 

Hind.  Juwasa. 

(c) .  Gnlgnlu  ; Bdellium.  @®©siS3^u). 

(d) .  The  juice  of  the  Sreevasaka  : turpentine, 

(e) .  Kunduruka  : The  resin  of  the  plant  Bosweilia  Thurifera, 


78 


BRIIIAT  SiUITIITA. 


[OH.  IL 


kingp,  of  turrets^  and  in  fixing  tlio  LInga  or  the  imago  in  the 
tempJe,  in  the  construction  of  walls  and  wells,  if  the  vege- 
table cement  above  referred  to,  be  melted  and  used_,  the 
structures  will  last  for  a crore  of  years. 

5 & 6.  Form  a mixture  ©f  shel-Iao,  the  resin  of 
the  plant  Boswellia  tliurifera,  Bdellium,  soot  in  the  ceilings 
of  houses,  the  fleshy  part  of  the  fruit  of  Kapitha  and  of 
Bilva,  the  fruit  of  the  Nagabala^aB  Madhuha  and  Man- 
jishta,  the  juice  of  the  Sarja  as  well  as  vinegar  made  from 
Iruit,  and  put  it  in  a jar  of  water,  heat  it  till  it  is  reduced 
to  an  eighth  of  its  bulk  ; the  resultiug  kalka  is  also  known 
as  Vajralepa  and  is  an  excellent  one  and  can  be  used  for 
the  several  purposes  already  mentioned. 

7.  Form  a mixture  of  the  horns  of  the  cow,  the  buf- 
falo, and  the  goat  reduced  to  powder,  the  hair  of  the  ass, 
the  skin  of  the  buffalo,  the  milk  of  the  cow  and  the  juice 
of  the  Nimba  and  the  Kapittha  trees  ; throw  the  mixture  in 
a jar  of  water  and  heat  it,  the  resulting  kalka  is  also  an 
excellent  animal  cement. 

8.  Melt  together  eight  parts  of  lead,  two  parts  of 
bronze,  and  one  part  of  brass  ,•  tho  result  will  be  a strong 
moiallic  cement.  This  is  according  to  Maya. 


CHAPTEEt  XI.  (58.) 

On  Temple  Images. 

1.  The  fine  particles  moving  in  the  rays  of  the  sun 
coming  into  a room  through  the  window  opening  are  known 
as  atoms.  Is  not  the  atom  the  first  of  all  measurements  f 

2.  Eight  atoms  make  an  hair’s  end  ; eight  hair’s  ends 
make  a nit  ,*  eight  nits  make  a louse  ; eight  lice  make  a 
barley  seed  ,*  eight  barley  seeds  make  an  inch,  which  is 
known  as  a unit  of  measure. 


(a).  Nagabala  : Tho  plant  Uraria  Lagopodioidcs, 


Cll.  II.] 


BrjKAT  SAMHITA. 


79 


3-  The  lioiglit  of  ilie  ^pedestal  of  an  imag-e  bo 

one-tliii’cl  of  sevcn-oighflis  of  ilie  lioigbi  of  tlie  entrance. 
The  heigliTi  of  tlie  image  shall  be  twice  the  heiglit  of  the 
pedestal. 

4.  The  breadth  and  length  of  tlie  face  of  the  image 
shall  each  he  12  inches.  'J'he  sage  Nagnagit  says  tliat  in 
the  Dravida  country  the  face  of  the  image  is  14  inches 
long. 

5.  The  nose,  the  forehead,  the  chin,  the  neclc,  and 
the  ear  of  the  image  shall  each  he  4 inches;  the  mouth 

shall  be  2 inches  ; the  breadth  of  the  chin  shall  also  be  2 

s 

inches, 

^ 

6.  The  forehead  shall  be  S inches  long;  2 inches 
from  it  are  the  frontal  hones  Avhich  shall  be  4 inches,  and 
the  ear  shall  be  2 inches  broad. 

7-  The  space  between  the  car  and  the  eyebrows 
shall  be  four  inches  and  a half  and  the  lobes  of  the  ear 
shall  be  well  formed. 

8-  According  to  Yasishtha  the  interval  between  the 
end  of  the  e^'e  and  the  ear  shall  be  4 inches  ; the  lower  lip 
shall  be  an  incli  broad  and  the  upper  one  shall  be  one-half 
the  size  of  the  lower, 

9.  Hie  GocchaY)  shall  be  half  an  inch  ; the  mouth 
shall  be  4 inches  long;  the  breadth  of  the  mouth  wdien 
open  shall  be  3 inches,  and  the  opening  sluill  bo  an  inch 
and  a half. 

10.  The  nose  shall  be  two  inches  broad  ; the  sense  of 
smell  is  at  the  tip  of  the  nose;  the  nose  shall  be  two 
inches  high  ; the  interval  between  the  eye  and  the  tip  of 
the  nose  shall  be  four  inches. 

dl.  The  e3m-lid  shall  be  two  inches  broad;  the  eye- 
ball shall  also  be  two  inches  broad ; the  breadth  of  the  pu- 


80 


BKIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  11. 


pil  of  the  eye  shall  be  two-thirds  of  an  inch.  The  eye-lids 
shall  be  open  with  a space  of  half  an  inch.  The  centre  of 
the  pupil  of  the  eye  where  the  sense  of  sight  remains  shall 
be  one-fifth  of  two- thirds  of  an  inch. 

12.  From  one  end  of  an  ej^ebrow  to  the  other  end 
of  the  other  eyebrow  shall  be  ten  inches.  The  breadth 
of  the  eye-brow  shall  behalf  an  inch.  The  interval  between 
the  eyebrows  shall  be  two  inches;  and  the  length  of  each 
eyebrow  shall  be  four  in  ches. 

13.  The  breadth  of  the  hair  of  the  eyebrows  shall  be 
half  an  inch  throughout ; at  the  end  of  the  eye  shall  be 
formed  the  figure  of  the  Karavira  flower  about  an  inch  in 
dimensions. 

14.  The  breadth  of  the  head  shall  be  32  inches  ; the 
same  when  measured  across  shall  be  14  inches.  In  paint- 
ing 12  out  of  the  32  inches  shall  be  visible  and  the  rest 
shall  be  invisible. 

15.  The  face  with  the  hair  growing  about  it  shall  be 
16  inches  according  to  Naguagit ; the  neck  shall  be  JO 
inches  broad;  the  same  when,  measured  around  shall  be  21 
inches. 

16.  The  heart  shall  be  12  inches  below  the  neck;  the 
navel  shall  be  12  inches  below  the  heart,  and  the  genital 
organ  shall  be  12  inches  below  the  centre  of  the  navel. 

17.  The  thighs  shall  be  24  inches  long;  the  shanks 
shall  also  be  24  inches  ; the  knee-shell  shall  be  4 inches, 
and  the  feet  shall  be  4 inclies  high. 

3 8.  The  length  of  the  feet  shall  be  12  inches  and  the 
breadth  shall  be  6 inches ; the  length  of  big  toe  shall  be  3 
inches  ; the  same  when  measured  around  shall  be  5 inches  ; 
the  next  toe  shall  also  be  3 inches. 

19.  The  other  three  toes  shall  each  be  one-eighth 
less  than  the  length  of  the  toe  before  it.  The  height  of 
the  big  toe  shall  be  an  inch  and  a quarter. 


BRinAT  SAMTIITA. 


81 


cn.  11.] 


20.  The  learned  say  that  the  nail  of  the  big  too 
shall  be  three-fourths  of  an  inch  broad  and  that  the  toe- 
nails shall  each  be  half  an  inch  or  less. 

21.  Tiie  shanks  when  moasured  around  at  the  end 
shall  be  11  inches.  The  breadth  at  the  ])lace  shall  be  5 
inches.  The  breadth  of  the  shanks  at  the  middle  shall 
be  7 inches;  the  shanks  when  measured  around  at  the 
middle  shall  be  27  inches. 


22.  The  knee  shall  be  8 inches  broad  at  the  middle; 

the  knee  when  raeasured’around  at  the  middle  shall  be  2T 
> 

inches.  The  breadth  of  the  thigh  at  the  middle  shall  bo 
14  inches^  the  same  when  measured  around  at  the  middle 
shall  be  28  inches,  ' 

23.  The  hip  shall  be  18  inebes  broad;  the  same 
when  measured  around  shall  be  44  inches.  The  navel 
shall  be  an  inch  deep- 

24.  The  measure  of  the  body  round  the  middle  of 
the  navel  shall  be  42  inches.  The  interval  betw^een  the 
two  nipples  of  the  breast  shall  he  IG  inches  and  the  arm" 
pit  shall  be  at  a distance  of  6‘inches  from  the  nipple. 

25.  The  shoulders  shall^be  8 inches  long  ; the  upper 
arm  shall  be  12  inches  long;  the  lower  arm  shall  be  6 
inches  and  the  wrist  shall  be  4 inches. 

2G.  The  upper  arm  when  measured  around  at  its  root 
shall  be  16  inches  and  the  lower  arm  when  measured  around 
at  the  wrist  shall  be  12  inches.  The  breadth  of  the  palm 
shall  be  6 inches  and  its  length  shall  be  7 inches, 

27.  The  middle  finger  shall  be  5 inches  long ; the 
forefore-finger  shall  be  shorter  than  the  middle  finger  by  one 
half  of  the  length  of  its  middle-joint ; the  length  of  the 
f ing  finger  shall  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  fore-finger^, 

11 


BET  HAT  SAM  HIT  A. 


[CII.  11. 


and  tho  little  finder  shall  be  shorter  than  the  middle  hriEer 
by  its  last  joint. 

28.  The  thumb  shall  consist  of  two  joints,  and  tho  other 
fingers  of  three  joints  ejich.  The  breadth  of  the  nails  shall  be 
one-half  of  the  length  of  the  joints  on  which  they  grow- 

29.  The  images  shall  be  shaped  and  adorned  according 
to  the  fashion  of  the  country.  By  placing  images  in  temples 
a person  becomes  prosperous. 

30.  The  images  of  Rama,  the  son  of  Daserattha  and  of 
Bali,  the  son  of  Yiroohana,  shall  each  be  120  inches  hio'h 
The  Devas  of  middle  importance  shall  be  108  inches  high 
and  the  inferior  Devas  shall  be  96  itiches  high. 

31.  The  image  of  Bhagavan  Vishnu  shall  have  either 
8 hands  or  4 hands  or  2 hands  ; there  shall  be  a mole  at  the 
breast  known  as  Sreevatsa  ; and  the  figure  shall  be  repre- 
sented to  wear  at  the  breast  the  gem  known  as  Koustuhha. 

32.  The  body  shall  be  of  the  color  of  the  Atasi 
flower  ; the  cloth  shall  be  of  yellow  color  ^ the  countenance 
cheerful,  and  the  image  shall  be  made  to  wear  pendants  and 
crowns.  The  neck,  the  breast,  the  shoulders  and  the  arm 
shall  be  large. 

33.  Three  of  the  right  hands  shall  hold  a sword,  a 
stick  and  an  arrow,  and  the  fourth  hand  shall  appear  stretch- 
ed and  held  vertically  (a).  The  four  left  hands  shall 
hold  the  bow,  the  target,  the  discus  and  the  conch  shell. 

3R  If  the  image  of  Vishnu  be  made  with  only  four 
hands,  one  of  the  two  right  hands  shall  hold  the  stick  and 
the  other  shall  be  raised  as  an  ahhaya-hasta.  Of  the  two 
left  hands  one  shall  hold  the  conch-shell  and  the  other  the 
discus. 

35.  If  the  image  be  made  with  only  two  hands,  the 

(a.)  This  position  of  the  hand  is  known  as  abliaja-basta — telling  meji 
not  to  fear. 


cu.  11.] 


BlilEIAT  SAMTIITA. 


83 


ri^ixbfc  liand  shall  be  raised  up  as  an  abha3Ui-hasfc:i  and  the' 
left  shall  hold  the  conch-shell,  lie  who  desires  prosperity 
shall  make  an  im'tge  of  Vishnu  as  stated  above. 

3G.  The  imago  of  Bala-deva  shall  be  made  wiih  a 
plough  in  one  hand,  Avitli  eyes  dim  through  pride,  with  a 
])endant  and  a body  white  like  cjnch-slielJ,  moon  and  the 
stem  of  the  lotus. 

87-  Between  the  images  of  Bala-deva  and  Krishna 
(Vislinn)  shall  be  placed  the  image  of  a beautiful  woman 
with  her  left  hand  in  her  middle  and  with  a lotus  in  her 
right  hand.  ^ 

88.  If  the  figure  be  made  with  four  hands,  the  two 
left  hands  shall  holcBthe  lotus  and  a book  and  one  of  the 
right  hands  shall  be  shaped  as  a Varada-liasta  (a)  and  the 
other  hand  shall  hold  a rosaiy  of  crystal  beads. 

39.  If  the  figure  bo  made  with  eight  hands,  the  four 
left  hands  shall  hold  the  "water  bowb  the  bow,  the  lotus, 
and  a book ; and  of  the  four  right  hands,  one  shall  be  made 
into  a Varada-hasta  and  the  other  three  shall  hold  the 
arrow,  the  mirror  and  crystal  heads. 

40.  The  image  of  Samba  (son  of  Balarama)  shall  be 
made  with  a stick  in  one  hand  ; and  that  of  Pradyumua  (son 
ot  Krishna)  with  a bow  in  his  hand  ; the  images  of  the 
wives  of  these  shall  be  made  each  with  a sword  in  one  hand, 
a target  in  the  other. 

41.  The  image  of  Brahm.a  sh:dl  be  made  as  seated  in 
a lotus  with  a water  jar  in  one  hand  and  with  four  faces. 
The  image  of  Subbramania  shall  be  made  to  appear  young 
with  the  weapon  known  as  Saktiiu  his  hand,  and  as  mount- 
ed on  a peacock. 

42.  The  image  of  Iiidra  shall  be  mounted  on  a white 

(a)  Varada-hasta:  as  if  j^raiitirig  tho  worshii^pers  their  wishes — the 
liand  is  made  to  hang  down  witli  the  palm  towards  the  worshipper  and  the 
fingers  slightly  hciit  np. 


81 


BlilHAT  SAMHITA- 


[CH.  IL 


elephant  with  four  tusks  and  with  the  weapon  known  as 
Yajrayadlia  in  his  hand;  there  shall  be  a third  eye  in  the 
forehead  of  the  tii^ure. 

43-  The  image  of  Siva  shall  be  made  with  the  figure 
of  the  Moon  in  his  head  as  it  appears  in  the  third  lunar  day 
after  the  New-moon,  as  mounted  on  a bull  with  a third  eve 
in  his  forehead,  with  the  trident  in  one  hand  and  a bow 
known  as  Pinaka  in^the  other.  The  left  half  of  the'  image 
may  be  made  of  half  the  body  of  Parvati;,  Siva’s  wife. 

44.  The  image  of  Budha  shall  be  made  as  seated  in  a 
lotus  with  the  hands  and  feet  marked  with  the  figure  of 
the  lotus,  with  a cheerful  countenauoe  and  with  short  hair. 

45.  The  imago  of  the  God  of  the  Arhats  shall  be 
made  with  hands  hanging  down  to  the  knees  with  the  mol© 
known  as  Sreevatsa  in  his  breast^  wdth  a placid  look  and  as 
naked,  young  and  beautiful. 

4G.  In  the  image  of  the  Sun,  the  nose,  the  forehead, 
the  shanks,  the  thighs,  the  cheeks  and  the  breast  shall  be 
large.  In  adorning  the  image,  the  method  followed  in  the 
northern  countries  shall  he  followed.  Prom  breast  to  th© 
feet  shall  appear  covered. 

47.  The  Sun  shall  be  represented  as  holding  a lotus  in 
each  hand,  as  wearing  a crown  and  pendants,  with  garlands 
hangiiig  from  his  neck  and  as  surrounded  by  Devas. 

48.  The  face  shall  be  bright  as  the  lotus.  The  body 
shall  be  covered  with  stitched  coats  ; the  countenance  shall 
be  cheerful  and  the  lustre  of  the  gems  shall  add  beauty  to 
the  image.  He  who  fixes  iu  a temple  an  image  of  the  Sun 
of  the  above  description  will  enjoy  prosperity. 

49.  An  image  only  a cubit  high  is  good /one  2 cubits 
long  will  bring  on  wealth  ; and  if  the  height  be  3 or  4 cubits 
there  will  be  plenty  and  prosperity. 

50.  If  the  image  has  an  extra  organ  the  master  will 


cn.  11.] 


r.RTirAT  SAMIIITA. 


85 


suffer  from  kings;  if  it,  be  one  of  defective  orgnns^  the 
master  will  suffer  frotJi  diseases  ; if  tlie  belly  be  depressed, 
there  will  be  suffering  from  hunger,  and  if  the  figure  appear 
tliiii  there  will  be  loss  of  wealth. 

51.  If  the  image  be  wounded,  the  master  will  die  bj 
weapons  ; if  the  left  side  of  the  image  be  bent,  the  master’s 
wife  wnll  suffer,  and  if. the  right  side  be  bent,  the  master 
will  meet  with  early  death. 

52.  If  the  eyes  of  the  image  look  upwards,  the  master 
will  become  blind,  and  if  the  eyes  look  downwards,  the  mas- 
ter wilt  suffer  from  anxieties  of  mind.  These  remarks  apply 
as  well  to  the  images  of  the  other  Devas  as  to  that  of  the 
Sun, 

53.  The  height  of  the  Linga  shall  be  equal  to  the 
length  of  the  circumference  ; the  lower  one-third  of  the  Linga 
shall  be  four-sided,  the  central  third  shall  be  eight- sided, 
and  the  upper  third  shall  be  round- 

54.  The  lower  part  of  the  Linga  shall  be  planted  into 
the  ground,  the  middle  part  shall  be  made  to  fit  the  hole  in 
the  pedestal.  The  breadth  of  the  pedestal  all  round  the  hole 
shall  be  of  the  length  of  the  portion  of  the  Linga  above. 

55.  If  the  Linga  be  thin  and  tall, the  country  will  perish  ; 
if  a side  be  defective,  towns  will  perish  ; and  there  will  be 
suffering  if  there  be  any  wound  in  the  bead  of  the  Linga. 

56.  The  images  of  the  mother  deities  shall  also  be 
made  after  the  manner  of  the  country  and  agreeably  to 
their  names.  The  image  of  llevanta  (son  of  Surya)  shall 
be  represented  as  mounted  on  a horse  and  as  surrounded  by 
a party  of  hunters. 

57.  The  image  of  Yama  (God  of  death)  shall  be 
mounted  on  a buffalo  and  as  holding  a club  in  his  hand. 
The  image  of  Yarunu  shall  hold  a rope  iu  his  hand  and  bo 


86 


BRTHAT  SAMHITA. 


[err.  12. 

lYionnt.ed  on  a swan.  Tlie  image  of  Kubera  shall  be  repre- 
sented as  being  borne  by  meiij  with  a large  belly  and  wear- 
ing a beautiful  crown. 

The  image  of  Ganesa  shall  be  represented  with  the  face 
of  the  elephant,  with  a hanging  belly,  with  an  axe  in  his 
hand,  with  a single  tusk,  and  with  the  root  of  the  Mulaka 
with  its  Idack  leaves. 


CHAPTEK  XIL  (59.) 

On  Entry  into  the  Forest,  (a.) 

1.  On  an  auspicious  day  selected  by  the  astrologer 
and  suited  to  the  master,  when  the  several  indications 
]-efeiT-ed  to  in  my  w^ork  on  Yatra  are  all  good,  the  party  shall 
leave  for  the  forest. 

2.  The)^  shall  not  cut  trees  that  grow  on  cremation 
ground,  in  roads5  in  temples,  ant-hills,  flower  gardens,  the 
abodes  of  religious  devotees,  places  of  worship,  junctions  of 
rivers  as  well  as  trees  grown  by  human  labour. 

3-  They  shall  not  cut  trees  that  are  bent,  that  are 
covered  with  creepers  or  struck  down  by  lightning  or 
broken  by  the  wind,  or  that  have  fallen  of  themselves  or 
that  are  broken  by  elephants  or  that  have  dried  or  have 
been  burnt  or  that  contain  the  bee-hive. 

4.  The  trees  that  are  of  glossy  leaves,  flowers  and 
fruits,  are  fit  for  the  purpose  ; the  tree  selected  shall  be 
adorned  with  flowers  and  duly  honored. 

5.  If  the  master  is  a Brahmin,  the  trees  Devaclarn, 
Sandel,  Sami  and  Madhuka  are  fit  for  the  purpose.  If  the 
master  is  aKshatrya,  the  trees  Margosa,  Aswattha,  Khadira; 
and  Bilva  are  fit  for  the  purpose. 

G.  If  the  master  is  a Vysya,  the  trees  Jeevaka,  Kha- 
dira, Sindhuka  and  Syandana  should  be  selected  for  the 


(a)  For  tiic  purpose  of  cutting  wood  for  tire  images  of  the  Deyas. 


CIT.  12. 


BRinAT  SAJiniTA. 


87. 


purpose  ; and  if  ilie  master  is  a Sndrn,  the  trees  Tindiihn^ 
Kesarr,  8arja  and  Arjnna  should  he  selected. 

7-  In  the  Ibrtnation  of  the  Liuga  or  an  image,  the 
sides  of  the  tree  as  it  grew  shall  be  preserved  ; for  this 
purpose  the  sides  as  well  as  the  bottom  and  the  top  shall 
be  marked  before  cutting. 

8.  The  tree  to  be_  cut  shall  fu;st  be  worshipped  with 
rice  cooked  in  milk,  sweet-meat  balls,  lace,  curdled  milk,  and 
sweet-meats  made  of  ground  Sesarnnm  and  sugar  and  the 
like,  liquor,  floAvers^  scented  smoke  and  sandal  paste. 

9.  Then  shall  be  AAmrshipped  at  night  the  Devas,  t ho  ' 
Pitris,  the  Pisachas,3the  Kakshasas,  the  Nagas^  the  Asuras, 
the  Ganadevas,  Vinayak  and  others.  The  tree  shall  bo 
touched  by  the  hand  and  the  following  mantras  shall  be 
pronounced. 

10.  0 tree,  thou  hast  been  selected  for  the  image  of 
such  and  such  a Deva.  Salutation  to  thee.  I request  thee 
to  accept  the  puja  duly  performed  by  me. 

11.  The  Bhutas  that  might  dwell  in  this  tree  are  re- 
quested to  accept  the  pi-esents  offered  and  de]airt  and  dwell 
in  some  other  place.  Kindly  bear  the  troubles  we  subject 
you  to.  Salutation  to  you. 

12.  Early  next  morning  water  shall  be  poured  over 
the  root  of  the  tree  ; the  axe  shall  be  rubbed  over  with  honey 
and  ghee,  and  the  tree  shall  first  be  cut  on  the  north-easteim 
side,  and  the  other  parts  shall  be  cut  round  from  left  to 
right. 

13.  If  the  tree  falls  on  the  eastern,  north-eastern  or 
the  northern  side,  it  indicates  prosperity.  But  if  it  falls  on 
the  remaning  five  sides — the  south-east,  the  south,  south- 
west, &c  , there  will  respectively  be  fear  from  fire,  suffei-iug 
from  hunger,  disease,  disease  again,  and  the  death  of  the 
}iQi‘ses, 


88 


I3RIH4T  SAMmi'A. 


[cri.  13. 


14.  Matters  ponnected  with  the  fall  ol  the  tree,  the 
cutting  of  it,  and  with  what  might  be  inside  the  tree  have 
been  treated  of  by  me  in  the  Chapter  on  ludra-Dhwaja  and 
on  Houserbuilding.  They  apply  here  also. 


CHAPTER  XIII.  (60.) 

On  the  fixing  of  the  Images  in  Temples? 

1.  Either  on  the  northern  or  eastern  part  of  the 
temple,  the  person  learned  in  the  matter  shall  erect  a shec] 
with  openings  on  all  sides  and  adorn  it  with  plantains  and 
festoons. 

2 & 3.  The  eastern  part  of  the  shed  shall  be  adorned 
with  garlands  of  flowers  and  with  fla^gs  of  various  colors. 
The  south-eastern  side  shall  be  adorned  with  garlands  and 
flags  of  red  color.  The  southern  and  south-western  sides 
shall  be  adorned  with  those  of  black  color.  Garlands  and 
flags  on  the  western  side  shall  be  white  ; those  on  the  north- 
western side  shall  be  white-red  ; those  on  the  northern  side 
shall  be  of  bright  colpr,  and  those  on  the  north« eastern  side 
shall  bo  of  yellow  color. 

4.  Images  made  from  wood  or  earth  will  give  the 
master  long  life,  wealth,  strength  and  success.  Images 
made  of  gems  or  precious  stones  will  do  good  to  the  world 
at  large.  Images  made  of  gold  will  give  the  master  good 
health. 

5.  Images  of  silver  will  increase  the  master’s  fame. 
Images  of  copper  will  increase  his  family.  Images  of  stone 
or  the  Linga  will  bring  hirp  much  lancls. 

6.  If  a pike  is  seen  driven  into  an  image,  the  master 
will  perish  with  his  family;  if  there  be  holes  in  imag’es,  the 
piaster  will  suffer  from  diseases  and  never  ending  troubles* 

7.  Tlie  platform  in  the  centre  of  the  shed,  shall  bie 


cii.  13.] 


BRIIIAT  SAMEITTA. 


89 


■waslied  with  cow-dung;  it  sluill  tlien  Le  covered  witli  sand, 
and  over  it  sliall  be  spread  tlio  Kusa  grass;  and  the  imagG 
shall  be  pjlaced  in  it  in  the  ]3hadrasfina  posture — with  a leg 
resting  on  the  ground  and  the  other  bent  up  horizontally  at 
the  knee. 

8.  The  image  shall  be  bathed  with  the  milk  of  the 

Plaksha,  Asv/atha,  Udurnbara,  Sirisha,  and  Yata,  and  with 

water  mixed  with  the  Kusa  grass  and  the  like  sacred  plants. 

« 

9.  It  shall  also  be  rubbed  with  earth  taken  from  place- 
^’odden  over  by  elephants  and  bulls,  from  the  neighbour 
hood  of  mountainSj  fiom  ant-hills,  from  the  junction  (d  rireivs 

and  lotus  tanks.  It. shall  also  be  bathed  with  sacred  waters 
and  with  Panchagayya.(a) 

10.  It  shall  be  bathed  in  fragrant  waters  in  jars  in 
which  shall  be  thrown  gold  and  gems  attended  with  various 
music  and  with  the  chanting  of  Yedic  hymns  ; while  bath- 
ing, the  image  sliall  be  placed  to  face  the  east. 

11.  While  the  image  is  being  bathed,  the  Brahmins 
shall  chant  the  mantras  sacred  to  Indraon  the  eastern  side; 
and  on  the  south-eastern  side  shall  be  chanted  mantras 

sacied  to  Agni.  d he  master  shall  pay  the  Brahmins  well 
and  show  them  due  honors. 


12.  The  Brahmins  shall  throw  Ahutis  into  the  fire, 
chanting  hymns  sacred  to  the  particular  Deva  whose  imag 
is  before  them.  The  indications,  together  with  their  inter- 
pretations,  connected  with  the  homa-fire  have  already  been 
Stated  by  me  in  the  Chapter  on  Indra-Dhwaja. 

lo.  If  the  flame  should  be  attended  wdth  smokes  and 
sparks,  and  if  it  should  whirl  from  right  to  left,  it  indicates 
evil^  If  the  ofiiciatiDg  priest  slmuld  be  of  forgetful  memory 


BRTHAT  SAMITITA. 


S() 


[CB.  IX 


or  begin  to  quote  a wrong  portion  of  the  Vedictoxtj,  it  indi- 
cates evil. 

14.  After  bathing  the  image,  it  shall  be  dressed  in  a 

O * 

new  doth  and  adorned  with  flowers  and  sandal  and  shall 
be  laid  by  the  waster  on  a well-spread  bed. 

15.  The  night  shall  be  spent  by  the  side  of  the  image 
in  music  and  dance  by  persons  that  do  not  sleep_,  and  the 
fixing  ceremony  shall  be  done  at  the  hour  mentioned  by  the 
astrologer. 

16.  The  next  day  the  image  shall  again  he  adorned, 
with  flowers,  cloth,  and  sandal  and  shall  be  taken  round  the 
temple  attended  with  the  music  of  the  conch-shell  and  other 
instruments. 

17-  A large  quantity  of  cooked  rice  shall  be  presented 
to  the  image  ; learned  Brahmins  shall  be  duly  lionored  and 
pieces  of  gold  shall  be  thrown  into  the  central  pit  of  the 
pedestal. 

18.  Special  honors  shall  be  paid  to  the  officiating 
priest,  the  astrologer,  the  Brahmins,  learned  men  and 
artists.  The  master  will  enjoy  prosperity  in  this  world  as 
well  as  in  the  next. 

19.  The  Bhagavatas  are  the  worshippers  of  Vishnu  ; 
the  Magas  are  the  worshippers  of  the  Sun  ; Brahmins  wear- 
ing ashes  are  the  worshippers  of  Siva.  Persons  possessed 
of  a knowledge  of  the  Devas  attendant  on  the  Matri  Davas 
are  the  worshippers  of  the  Afatri  Devas.  The  Brahmins 
generally  are  the  worshippers  of  Brahma.  The  Sakyas  are 
the  worshippers  of  the  God  of  the  Arhats.  The  Boudhas 
are  the  worshippers  of  Badha.  The  ceremony  of  fixing  the 
images  and  the  like  ceremonies  shall  be  perfornied  by  tlie 
respective  worshippers  of  the  several  images. 

20  & 21.  The  ceremony  of  fixing  the  image  shall  be 
performed  in  the  Uttarayana — when  the  Sun’s  course  is 


cn.  14.] 


BKIHAT  SAMHITA. 


01 


towards  the  north, — in  the  li^ht  half  of  a month,  when  the 
Moon  occupies  the  house,  the  Navamsa,  the  Trirngainsa,  the 
Drekkaiia  or  the  Devadasainsa  of  Jupiter;  when  the  rising 
sign  and  the  rising  iSavainsri  ai’e  fixed,  when  benefic  planets 
occupy  the  Kendra  or  the  Trikona  houses,  and  the  malefic 
planets  occupy  the  ord,  6th  and  11  tli  houses^  when  the  Moon 
passes  either  thi’ough  any  of  the  fixed  asterisms  or  the  soft 
asterisms,  or  through  the  asterism  of  Sravana,  Pushya  Or 
Swati,  on  any  weekxlay  excepting  Tuesday,  and  on  a day 
suited  to  the  master’s  star. 

22.  Thus  have  I treated  briefly  of  the  subject  of 
fixing  the  In  ages  in  Temples,  for  the  benefit  of  the  people 
at  large.  Sui'va  has^  in  his  work,  treated  at  full  length  of 
matters  connected  with  x^dhivasana  (watching  the  image 
at  night  with  music  and  dance)  and  with  fixing  the  image 
in  its  pedestal. 


CHAPTER  XIV.  (61.) 

On  the  Features  of  Cow^s  and  Oxen. 

1.  All  that  Parasara  told  Briliadratha  about  cows  and 
oxen  I shall  here  biieflv  state.  I shall  however  treat  scien- 
tifically  of  the  animals  possessing  good  features. 

.2  Cows  whose  eves  are  dim  and  wdth  tears  and  dis- 

•/ 

agreeable  to  look  at  and  whose  eyes  resemble  those  of  tho 
mouse,  will  bring  on  misery.  Cows  whose  horns  are  moving 
and  flat,  wdiose  bodies  are  rough  and  whose  color  resembles 
that  of  tho  ass,  will  also  bring  on  evil. 

3.  Cows  having  ten,  seven  or  four  teeth  and  those 
whose  heads  are  hanging  and  hairless,  whose  backs  are  bent 
or  depressed,  necks  short  and  thick,  hip  resembling  a grain 
of  barleys  in  shape,  whose  hoofs  are  broken. 

4.  As  well  as  those  with  long,  i-ed,  black  tongues 
with  small  ankles,  with  a large  hump  on  tho  back,  wflth  thin 


92  BRIIIAT  SAMITA.  [CH.  14#' 

slender  bodies  and  with  either  defective  or  excessive  organs^ 
will  bring  on  evil. 

5.  The  ox  whose  testicle  is  large  and  hangs  down^ 
whose  breast  is  covered  with  muscles,  whose  cheek  is  large 
and  marked  with  sinews,  and  whose  penis  is  thick  in  three 
places;,  will  bring  on  evil. 

6.  The  ox,  whose  eyes  resemble  those  of  the  cat, 
whose  color  is  brown,  whose  body  is  rough,  whose  lips,  jaws 
and  tongue  are  black,  whose  breathing  is  like  snoring,  and 
which  causes  annoyance  to  the  herd  of  cows,  is  not  fit  for 
the  Brahmins. 

7.  The  ox  that  passes  excrement  in  large  lumps,  whose 
horns  do  not  grow,  whose  belly  is  white,  whose  body  is  of 
the  color  of  the  deer  and  which  causes  annoyance  to  the 
herd  of  cows,  is  to  be  rejected  though  it  may  be  a home- 
bred one. 

8.  The  ox  wbieli  is  black,  of  ashy  color,  or  of  the 
color  of  the  Sun,  and  whose  eyes  resemble  those  of  the  cat^ 
is  not  fit  for  Brahmins. 

9.  The  ox,  which,  while  at  work  lifts  up  its  leg  as  if 
from  a mire,  whose  neck  is  thin  and  eyes  fearful,  is  an  ani- 
mal  of  inferior  kind*  Such  animals  cannot  carry  heavy 
burdens. 

10.  The  ox  whose  lips  are  soft,  close  and  red,  whose 
ears  are  small,  short  and  raised  up,  whose  belly  is  fine, 
whose  ankles  are  prominent, 

11.  Whose  hoofs  are  red  and  close,  whose  breast  is 
strong,  the  hump  on  whose  back  is  large,  whose  skin  and 
hair  are  fine,  soft  and  thin,  whose  horns  are  red  and  small, 

12.  Whose  tail  is  thin  and  long,  whose  eyes  are  red 
at  the  ends,  whose  breathing  is  loud,  whose  shoulders  are 
like  those  of  the  lion,  whose  dew-lap  is  soft  and  small  and 
whose  gait  is  beautiful,  is  of  an  excellent  kind. 


BRinAT  SAATTIITA. 


03 


Cii.  15.] 


13.  The  ox,  the  cnrl  of  hair  or  rinn^let  on  whose  left 
side  is  from  ri^lit  to  left  atid  tlie  one  on  the  right  side  is 
from  left  to  rigfht,  and  whose  ankles  resemble  those  of  the 
deer,  is  an  excellent  one. 

14.  The  ox  whose  e3^es  are  like  Vydiirga  or  the  jas- 
tniiid  or  the  water  bubble,  wliose  eye-lids  are  thick  and 
whose  hoofs  are  close,  is  also  excellent  and  will  cany  heavy 
burdensi 

15.  The  ox  with  a wrinkle  at  the  end  of  its  nose, 
whose  face  is  like  that  of  the  cat,  whose  right  side  is  white^ 
whose  color  is  that  of  the  white  or  bine  lotus  or  red  cotton, 

V 

whose  tail  is  fine  and  whose  speed  is  like  that  of  the  hoi'se  ; 

16.  Whose  testicle  is  hanging,  whose  belly  is  like 
that  of  the  ofoat  and  whose  buttocks  and  breast  are  con- 
traded^  will  bring  on  prosperity,  carry  heavy  burdens  and 
go  great  distances. 

17*  The  ox  which  is  white,  whose  eyes  are  of  brown 
olor,  whose  horns  are  red  and  whose  face  is  large,  is  known 
as  Ilaonsa.  It  brings  on  prosperity  and  an  increase  of  the 
herd. 

18-  The  ox  whose  tail  hangs  to  the  ground,  whose 
buttocks  and  03^8  are  red,  and  tlje  hump  on  whose  back  is 
fine,  and  whose  bod3"  is  variously  colored,  will  make  his 
master  the  lord  of  wealth  at  once. 

19.  The  ox,  one  of  whose  legs  is  white,  is  also  a good 
one,  whatever  may  be  his  color.  If  oxen  of  excellent  sort 
cannot  be  had,  those  of  middle  importance  may  be  procured 
and  used. 


CHAPTER  XV.  (62). 

On  the  Features  op  the  Hog. 

1.  The  dog  which  has  five  nails  in  each  of  its  hind 
legs,  three  in  the  left  front  leg,  and  six  in  the  right  froii 


BEIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[cs.  16. 


leg-,  whose  lips  and  the  tip  of  whose  nose  are  red,  whose  gait 
is  like  that  of  the  lion;,  which  walks  smelling  the  ground, 
and  whose  tail  is  hair}',  eyes  like  stars,  ears  hanging  and 
soft,  will  before  long  make  his  master  exceedingly  wealth}^. 

2.  The  bitch  which  Itas  five  nails  in  each  of  the'hind 
legs,  six  in  the  left  front  leg  and  five  in  the  right  front  leg, 
whose  eyes  are  like  jasmine,  whose  tail  is  curled  up  and 
whose  body  is  of  browji  color  and  ears  hanging,  will  protect 
the  kingdom  of  her  master. 


CHAPTER  XVI.  (03.) 

On  the  Featurh]s  of  the  Cock,- 

1.  The  cock  whose  wings  and  fingers  are  straight^ 
whose  mouth,  nail  and  comb  are  red,  whose  body  is  white, 
and  which  crows  melodiously  early  in  the  morning,  will 
bring  on  prosperity  to  the  king,  his  kingdom  and  his  horse, 

2.  The  cock  whose  neck  is  of  the  shape  of  the  barley, 
whose  bod}^  is  of  the  color  of  the  frnit  Badari,  and  one  whose 
head  is  large  and  body  of  ditferent  colors,  are  excellent  in 
tiglit.  The  cock  of  the  color  of  honey  or  the  bee  Avill  bring 
on  success  ; one  that  is  of  thin  body  and  of  a weak  throat 
and  lame  legs  is  not  a good  one. 

3.  The  hen  which  crows  softly  and  melodiously,  whose 
body  is  fine  and  glossy,  and  whose  face  and  eyes  are  beauti- 
ful, will  bring  to  a king  wealthy  fame,  success,  health  and 
strength, 

O 


CHAPTER  XVir.  (64). 

On  the  Features  of  the  Turtle. 

1.  The  turtle  which  is  of  the  color  of  the  crystal  or 
silver,  adorned  with  black  lines,  whose  body  is  of  the  shape 
of  the  pot,  and  whose  back-bone  is  beautiful,  and  the  turtle 
whose  body  is  of  the  color  of  the  Sun  and  covered  with  nu- 


cii.  17.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


95 


inerons  small  spotS;  will  make  a person  as  prosperous  as  a 
prince  i£  they  dwell  in  his  house. 

2.  The  turtle  which  is  blank  as  the  bee  or  collyrinm 
with  beautiful  spots  over  his  bodj^  which  has  no  defective 
organs,  whose  head  is  like  that  of  the  serpent  and,  whose 
Jieck  is  large,  will  increase  the  territories  of  the  king, 

3.  The  turtle  of  the  color  of  Vydurya,  whose  neck  is 
large,  Mdiose  body  is  smooth  and  of  triangular  shape,  and 
whose  back-bone  is  beautiful,  is  of  excellent  kind.  It  shall 
be  put  in  pleasure  tanks  and  water  pots  by  kings  for  the 
increase  of  their  prosperity. 


CHAPTER  XVIir.  (65.) 

On  the  Features  of  the  Goat. 

1.  We  shall  now  proceed  to  describe  the  bad  and  good 
features  of  the  goat.  A goat  which  has  8,  9 or  lO  teeth  will 
bring  wealth  to  a person  if  it  dwells  in  his  house.  One  that 
has  7 teeth  shall  be  rejected. 

2.  A white  goat  which  has  a black  ringlet  on  the  right 
.side  brings  on  prosperity.  A goat  that  resembles  the  ante^ 
lope  whose  color  his  black-red  and  which  has  a white  ring- 
let, conduces  to  prosperity. 

3.  The  fleshy  excrescence  which  hangs  from  the  neck 
of  a goat  is  known  as  Mani.  A goat  wdth  a single  mani 
brings  on  prosperity  ; one  that  has  two  or  three  mauis  brings 
on  wealth. 

4.  A goat  tiiat  lias  no  wool  on  it  will  make  the  owner 
prosperous,  and  one  that  is  either  wholly  white  or  wholly 
black,  or  half  white  and  half  black,  or  half  brown  and  half 
black,  will  bring  on  wealth. 

5.  Tho  goat  which  passes  as  the  foremost  of  the  herd 


BRIHAT  SAMIIITA. 


[CH.  18* 


or  wliich  first  gets  into  water,  will  do  good  as  well  as  one 
with  a white  head  or  with  a tikkika'?)  in  the  head. 

6.  A goat  which  has  a ringlet  in  the  neck  or  head,  or, 
one  which  is  of  the  color  of  the  Sesamum  flour,  or  with  red 
^yes  or  of  white  body  and  black  legs,  or  of  black  body  and 
white  legs,  .will  bring  on  prosperity. 

7*  A goat  whose  body  is  white,  whose  testicles  are 
black,  and  which  has  a strip  of  cast  off  skin  round  the  waist, 
as  well  as  the  goat  that  walks  gently  and  with.^noise  will 
bring  on  prosperity. 

8.  A goat  whose  horns  and  legs^resemble  those  of  the 
antelope,  as  w^ell  as  the  one  whose  front^part  is  white  and 
the  hind  part  black,  will  bring  on  prosperity.  The.following 
is  Garga’s  stanza  on  the  subject  of  the  goat. 

9.  Tiie  four  species  of  goats  known  as  Kuttal-ca,  Kufilay 
Jatila  and  Vamana  are  the  children  of  Lakshmi,  the  Goddess 
of  wealth.  These  will  never  be  found  to  live  under  the  roof 
of  poor  people- 

10.  A goat  that  bleats  like  the  ass,  whose  tail  is  bright^ 
nails  disfigured,  body  of  bad  color,  eays  put  or  clipped,  head 
resembling  that  of  the  elephant,  and  mouth  corners  and  the 
tongue  black,  will  not  conduce  to  prosperity. 

11.  A goat  which  is  of  excellent  color,  with  a fine 
mane  and  with  no  wool  on  its  body,  and  whose  eyes  are  red, 
will  bring  to  his  master  health,  fame  and  wealth. 


CHAPTER  XIX.  (66). 

Ox  THE  FEATUKES  OF  THE  HoUSE. 

1.  The  horse  whosp  neck  and  eyes  are  long,  breast  and 
mane  broad  ^ lips,  tongue  and  the  corners  of  mouth  red  ; skin’ 
hair  and  tail  thin  ,*  hoof,  gait  and  face  beautiful ; ears,  lips  aud 
fails  short;  shanks,  knees  and  thighs  round  ; teeth  even  anc| 


.■cn.  20.’] 


BUIEIAT  SAMIUT'A. 


07 


wliite  and  limbs  .‘^3'mmetricab  (ine^  smooth  and  clean,  will 
cause  the  death  of  the  enemies  of  the  king. 

2.  The  horse  which  has  a ringlet  under  thoe3n--s,  in  the 
chin,  cheek,  heart,  neck,  tlie  part  between  the  nostrils,  tem- 
ples, the  buttocks,  part  below'  the  nostrils,  knees,  testicles, 
navel,  hump  on  the  back,  anus,  right  belly  and  feet,  will 
bring  on  evil. 

3.  TIio  horse  which  has  ringlets,  in  the  upper-lip,  neck, 
ears,  back,  loins,  eyes,  lips,  thighs,  front  legs,  bellj^,  sides  and 
fore-head,  will  bring  on  prosperity. 

4.  Of  these  beueflc  curls  and  ringlets,  there  shall  bo 
only  one  in  the  upper-  lip,  one  named  L'Jiruva  in  the  fore- 
head and  mane  and  twt>  in  tlie  Bandhm  (?)  and  TJ par  and] it  a 
(?)  parts  of  its  head  and  in  tho  breast. 

5.  A colt  has  six  white  teeth.  If  the  teeth  be  of  brown 
color,  the  animal  is  2 years  old;  if  the  central  and  coi-ner 
teech  in  both  lines  have  fallen  and  sprouted  again,  the 
animal  is  from  3 to  5 3^ears  old,  according  as  the  number  of 
such  teeth  is  3,  4 or  d ; if  the  lines  knowon  as  Kalilca,  Apeta 
(a  yellow  line),  Sidda  (black  line),  Kaclia  (white  line),  Mah- 
shika  (of  the  color  of  tho  bee)  ov  Sankha  (of  the  color  of 
the  conch  shell)  appear  in  the  teeth,  the  age  of  the  animal 
will  respectively  bo  from  (J  to  8,  9 to  11,  12  to  14,  ]5  to  17, 
18  to  20  or  21  to  23.  If  depressions  appear  in  the  teeth  or 
if  the  teeth  have  begun  to  shake,  or  if  they  have  fallen,  the 
age  varies  from  24  -to  60. 


CHAPTEE  XX.  (67.) 

On  the  Features  of  the  Elephant. 

1.  The  elephant  whose  tusks  are  of  the  color  of  honey  , 

whose  liinbs  are  welEdefined,  whoso  body  is  neitiier  largo 

nor  small,  and  which  is  capable  of  bearing  heavy  burdens, 

whose  limbs  are  symmetrica],  whose  back  bones  are  like 

13 


ERIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CE-  20. 

bows  and  whose  buttocks  resemble  those  of  the  pig;,  is  known 
as  BJiadra. 

2.  The  elephant  whose  breast,  arm-pits  and  folds  of 
skin  are  loose,  whose  belly  is  hanging,  whose  skin  and  neck 
are  thicks  whose  abdomen  resem})les  that  of  the  crow^  and 
whose  e3^es  are  like  those  of  the  lipn,  is  known  as  Manda. 

3.  The  elephant  whose  llps^  tail  and  genital  organ  are 
short,  whose  legs,  neck,  tusks,  trunk  and  the  ears  are  small 
and  whose  eyes  are  large,  is  known  as  Mfiga.  The  elephant 
which  possesses  the  three  sets  of  features  above  referred  to, 
is  known  as  Sanhirna. 

4.  The  Mriga  class  of  elephants  are  5 cubits  high,  7 
cubits  long  and  8 cubits  broad.  The  Manda  and  Bhadra 
classes  are  larger  by  one  and  two  cubits  respectively  iu 
each  respect.  No  fixed  measurenient  is  prescribed  for  tha 
Saukirna  class  of  elephants. 

5.  The  Bhadra  is  of  green  color  and  is  a rutting  ele- 
phant. The  Manda  is  of  ^^ellow  color.  The  Mriga  his  of  black 
color  and  is  also  a rutting  elephant.  The  Sankirua  is  of 
mixed  color  and  a rutting  elephant. 

G & 7.  The  elephant  whose  lips  and  mouth  are  red, 
whoso  eyes  resemble  those  of  the  sparrow,  whose  tusks  are 
shining,  rising  and  with  sharp  end,  whose  face  is  large  and 
long,  whose  back  bones  are  like  bows,  long  and  invisible, 
whose  mastahas  (round  protuberances  on  the  temples)  are 
covered  with  hair  and  resemble  the  turtle,  whose  ears,  mouth 
corners,  navel,  fore-head  and  genital  organs  are  large,  whose 
body  resembles  the  turtle,  whose  nails  are  18  or  20,  whose 
trunk  has  three  lines  and  is  rouud,  whose  tail  is  beautiful, 
and  whose  juice  (when  in  rut)  is  felt  to  be  of  good  smell 
when  the  animal  blows  through  its  trunk,  will  bring  on 
wealth. 

The  elephant  whose  tail  is  long,  trunk  red^  roar 


cii.  21.] 


BRIHAT  SAIIHITA. 


like  that  or  tlio  clouds,  and  neck  large,  long  and  round,  will 
bring  wealth  to  a king'. 

9 & 10.  Non-rutting  elephants,'  tlrose  whlcli  possess 
extra  or  defective  organs,  those  which  are  lame  or  sliort  or 
whose  tusks  resemble  the  horns  of  the  sheep,  whose  testicles 
are  visible,  those  which  possess  little  or  no  trunk, 
wliose  mouth  coruers  are  brown,  blue,  black  or  of  different 
colors,  tliose  which  possess  very  little  hair  about  the  face, 
those  which  have  no  tusks,  those  which  have  no  virility 
female  elephants  possessing  the  features  of  a male  elephant, 
and  pregnant  elephajits  must  be  sent  away  to  foreign  lands. 
They  produce  misery. 


(CHAPTER  XXL  (68.) 

On  the  Features  of  Man. 

1.  A learned  person  shall'  examine  a man’s  (1)  Kshe*^ 
tra  (body,  (2)  Mrija  (complexion),  (3)  Swara  (voice),  (4) 
Sain  (strength),  (5)  Samliati  (joints),  (6)  Sneha  fgloss),  (7) 
Varna  (color),  (8j  x\nnka  (shape  of  the  face),  (9)  Unmana 
(heiglit",  (TOj  Mana  (weight),  (11)  Prakriti  (disposition) 
and  (12)  Gati  (gait)  and  then  predict  his  fortune. 

I.  — Kslietra  (^Physical  Features). 

2.  If  the  feet  be  dry,  with  soft  soles,  of  the  color  of 
the  lotus,  with  close  toes,  beautiful,  red  nails,  beautiful  heels, 

always  warm  without  visible  sinews,  with  invisible  ankle 

*/  ' 

and  raised  like  the  turtle,  the  person  will  be  a king, 

3.  If  the  feet  be  like  winnows,  crooked  or  bent,  cover- 
ed with  sinews,  dry,  with,  toes  not  close  and  with  nail 
white  and  not  glossy,  the  person  will  be  poor.  If  the  feet 
be  large,  he  will  walk  much  ; if  of  brown  color,  his  family 
will  pei  ish  ,*  if  the  'soles  be  of  the  colorfof  burnt  clay,  he  will 
murder  a Brahjmin  ; and  if  the  color  be  yellow,  he  will  havQ 
cxual  intercourse  with  women  under  prohibition. 


BRIIIAT  SAM  HIT  A. 


[CH.  21  y 


4.  Ir  the  shanhs  be  covered  with  hair,  thin  and  scatter- 
ec]_,  and  if  they  be  round,  if  the  thighs  be  like  the  trunk  of  the 
elephant,  and  if  the  hnoes  be  large  and  botdi  alike,  the  person 
will  be  a king.  But  if  the  shanks  resemble  those  of  a dog 
or  a jackal,  the  person  will  be  poor. 

5.  If  a single  hair  grow  from  each  cell  over  the  bod}^;?- 
the  person  will  be  a king  ; if  two  hairs  grow  fi’om  it_,  the 
person  will  bo  learned  and  will  scrupulously  observe  the 
duties  of  life  as  prescribed  in  the  Yedas  ; if  three  or  more,, 
the  person  will  be  poor  and  afflicted  with  grief.  The  same 
remarks  apply  to  the  hairs  of  the  head* 

6.  If  there  be  no  flesh  in  thehnees;  the  person  will  die 
in  his  travels  ; if  the  knees  be  small,  he  will  become  popu- 
lar; if  broad,  he  will  become  poor;  if  sunk,  he  v/ill  be  sub- 
ject to  women  ; if  covered  v^dth  flesh,  he  will  become  a king, 
and  if  large,  he  will  live  long. 

V.  If  the  pey^fYbe  small,  the  person  will  he  rich;  if 
large  he  will  have  no  sons  ; if  it  be  inclined  on  the  left  side, 
lie  will  be  poor;  if  not  straight,  he  will  be  without  sons  and 
without  money  ; it  straight,  be  will  have  sons;  if  pointing  to 
the  ground,  he  will  be  poor;  if  covered  with  muscles,  he  will 
liave  very  few  sons  ; if  the  nut  of  the  penis  be  large,  be 
will  live  in  comfort,  and  if  tlie  penis  be  soft,  he  will  die  of 
urinarv  and  tlm  like  diseases. 

4/ 

8.  If  the  nut  be  invisible,  he  will  be  a king  ; if  the 
penis  be- long  and  fallen,,  he  will  be  poor;  and  if  either 
straight  and  round  or  rjmall  and  with  sinews,  he  will  be  rich* 

9.  A person  with  a single  testicle  wdll  suffer  death  by 
drowning;  if  the  testicles  be  not  alike,  he  wdll  be  dond  of 
sexual  intercourse  ; if  both  be  alike,  he  will  be  a king  ; if 
they  be  raised  up,  the  person  will  not  livelong ; and  if  they 
hang  down  lio  will  live  to  the  age  of  100  years. 

10.  If  the  nut  of  tlie  penis  be.  red,  the  person  will  be 


cn.  2l.} 


ET^IHAT  SAMlTITAv 


2(-)l 

3'Icli  ; if  it  Le  eitlior  wliite  or  of  dim  color,  lie  will  be  poor  ; 
if  the  urine  fall  with  uoisej  the  [lorsoti  will  live  in  comfort 
and  if  without  noise,  he  will  be  poor. 

11.  If  the  urine  hill  in  two,  tliree  or  four  lines  and 
twistin<:r  fi-om  left  to  rigid,  the  pei'son  will  be  a king;  and 
if  it  fall  broken  and  scattei  ed,  lie  will  be  poor. 

12.  If  the  urine  fall  in  a line  and  twisted,  the  person 
will  get  a T'cry  beautiful  son.  If  the  g’lans  ])enis  be  glossy, 
i-aised  and  even,  the  person,  ^Viii  enjoy  wealth,  women 
gems. 

13.  If  the  glan^  j^enis  be  depressed  in  the  middle,  the 
person  will  get  danghrers  and  will  be  poor  ; if  raised  in  the 
middle,  he  wdil  possess  many  cows;  if  it  be  not  very  largo 
or  very  much  raised,  he  wdll  be  rich. 

14.  If  tiie  urinary  orifice  be  dr}^  the  person  will  bo 
poor  and  ugly  ; if  the  semen  smell  like  a flowei',  the  person 
will  be  a king. 

15.  If  semen  should  smell  like  honey,  tlm  pei-son 
will  be  very  rich  ; if  it  smell  Idve  fish,  he  will  have  many 
children;  if  it  be  thin,  he  will  get  daughters,  and  if  ot  the 
smell  of  flesh,  he  will  live  in  great  comfort. 

IG.  If  it  be  of  the  smell  of  alcohol,  the  person  will 
perform  sacrificial  fire  ceremonies;  if  of  the  smell  of  salt, 
lie  will  be  poor.  A.  person  whose  sexual  intercourse  lasts 
for  a short  time,  will  live  long  ; if  otherwise,  he  will  die 
early. 

17.  A person  whose  rump  is  large,  will  be  poor.  If 
tlm  rump  be  full  of  flesh,  the  person  will  live  in  comfort; 
if  it  be  half  the  average  size,  he  will  be  sickly  ; and  if  it 
resemble  tliab  of  a frog,  be  will  be  a king, 

IS.  If  the  loins  resemble  those  of  the  lion,  the  person 
wdll  be  a king;  if  they  resemble  those  of  the  monkQy  OJ 


r 


BEIHAT  SAMHITA,. 


[CH.  21. 


the  camel,  lie  will  be  poor;  if  the  abdomen  be  even,  the  per- 
son will  live  in‘cora£ort;  if  it  he  like  a pot,  he  will  he  poor. 

19.  If  the  sides  he  not  defective,  the  person  will  be 
rich  ; if  they  be  depressed  and  bent,  he  wdll  have  no  enjov- 
ment;  if  the  belly  be  even,  the  person  will  live  well;  if  it 
be  depressed,  he  will  have  no  enjoyment. 

20.  If  the  belli/  be  high,  the  person  will  be  a king;' 
if  it  be  uneven,  he  will  be  a man  of  perverted  understanding 
if  it  be  like  that  of  the  serpent,  he  will  be  poor'  and  glut- 
totious. 

21.  If  the  navel  be  broad  and  liigh  all  round,  tho 
person  will  live  in  comfort  ; if  it  be  small  and  if  the  pit  be 
not  visible,  the  person  will  be  afflicted  with  miseries; 

22.  If  the  ff^avel  be  in^the  middle  of  a fold  of  the  skin 
or  if  it  be  depressed,  the  person  will  suffer  from  belly-ache 
and  will  be  poor;  if  the  navel  turn  from  right  to  left,  the 
person  will  be  a cheat ; if  it  turn  from  left  to  right,  he  will 
be  a man  of  good  perception  and  strong  memory. 

23.  If  the  navel  extend  on  both  sides  horizontally, 
fhe  person  will  live  long  3 if  it  extend  vei*tically  npWards, 
he  will  be  rich  ; if  vertically  downwards,  he  will  have  cows  3 
and  if  it  b’e  like  the  color  of  the  l6tii's',  the  person  will  be  a 
king. 

24.  If  there  be  one,  two,  three  or  four  folds  of  skin 
in  the  belly,  the  person  will  die  wounded  by  a weapon,  will 
enjoy  women,  will  become  a teacher  and  will  be  vastly 
learned  1 es[)ectively.  If  there  be  no  folds,  the  person  will 
be  a king. 

25.  If  the  folds  be  not  straight,  tlie  person  will  be 
wicked  and  will  Lave  sexual  intercourse  with  women  under 
prohibition  ; if  they  be  straiglit,  he  will  live  in  comfort  and 
will  never  covet  the  wives  of  other  men. 

26.  If  the  sidesibe  fleshy  and  soft  and  if  the  ringlets 
of  hair  over  them  tuiui  from  left  to  right,  the  person  will  be 


BRIIIAT  SAMUITA.. 


103 


CH.  21-] 


a king.  If  otherwise,  he  will  be  poor  and  wretched  and 
will  serve  under  otliers. 

27.  If  tlie  ni2:>ple  of  the  breast  be  not  hlgh_,  tlie  per* 

. gon  will  be  j)0})ular;  if  the  two  nii;)[)les  be  long  and  not 
alike,  he  will  be  poor;  if  tl>ey  be  large,  whether  high  or 
gunk,  the  person  will  be  a king  and  will  live  in  coinfurt. 

28-  If  the  hosom-he  high^  broal,  fleshy  and  firing  tlie 
person  will  be  a king  ; if  otherwise  and  covered  with  stiff 
liair  and  inuseles,  the  person  wdl  be  the  meanest  of  man- 
kind. 

29.  If  the  boffom  be  even,  the  person  will  be  rich  ; 
if  large,  he  will  be  k hero  j if  small,  poor  j if  uneven,  he  wdll 
be  poor  and  die  by.  a weapon. 

30.  if  the  collar  hones  be  not  alike,  the  person  will  be 
wicked;  if  the  joints  of  the  bones  be  large,  he  will  be  poor; 
if  they  be  high,  he  will  live  well  ; if  depressed,  he  will  bo 
poor  ; and  if  large,  he  will  be  rich. 

31.  If  the  neck  be  flab  or  dry  or  covered  with  muscles, 
the  person  will  become  poor  ; if  it  be  like  that  of  the  buffalo, 
he  will  be  a valiant  soldier ; and  if  it  be  like  that  of  the  ox, 
lie  will  die  by  a weapon. 

32.  If  the  neck  be  like  tlie  conch  shall,  the  person  will 
be  a king  ; if  it  be  lianging,  the  person  will  be  a glutton  ; 
if  the  hack  be  even  and  without  hairs,  the  person  will  ba 
rich,  otherwise,  he  will  be  poor. 

33.  If  the  armjnts  be  dry,  large,  high,  of  good  smell, 
both  alike  and  wir.h  much  hair,  the  person  will  be  rich;  if 
otlierwise,  he  will  be  poor. 

34.  If  the  shoulders  be  without  flesh,  coveied  with 
liair,  sunk  and  small,  the  person  will  be  poor;  but  if  broad, 
Jiigh  and  close,  he  will  live  in  comfort  and  be  powerful. 

5-5.  If  the  two  arms  be  round,  like  the  trunk  of  th® 


104 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  21. 


olepliant,  large^  bofcli  alike,  and^liangiug  down  to  tlie  knees, 
tbe  person  will  be  a'k'mg  ; but  if  they  be  short  and  covered 
with  liair,  be  will  be  the  meanest  of  mankind. 

3().  If  the  fingers  of  tlie  hand  be  long,  the  person  will 
live  in  comfort,'  if  they  be  without  skin  folds,  he  will  be 
popular  j it  small,  he  wdll  be  intelligent  3 and  if  tlat^  he  will 

serve  under  others. 

37.  If  the  fingers  of  the  hand  be  large,,  the  person  will 
be  poor,  and  if  bent  upwards,  he  will  die  by  weapons.  If 
the  hands  be  like  those  of  the  monkey,  the  person  will  be 
rich.,  and  if  like  those  of  the  tiger,  he  will  be  wicked. 

38.  If  the  ivristshe  invisible,  firm  and  close,  the  person 
will  be  a king;  if  otherwise  and  if  the  joints  be  loose,  the 
hands  will  suffer  s word- cut  ; and  if  they  should  craek_,  he 
will  be  poor. 

3^.  If  the  palm  of  the  hand  be  hollow,  tlie  person  Avill 
not  inherit  his  father’s  property  ; if  it  be  round  and  hollow, 
he  will  be  rich,;  and  ifliigb,  he  will  be  generous. 

40.  If  the  palms  of  both  hands  be  alike,  the  person 
will  be  poor  and  wicked;  if  red,  he  will  be  rich;  if  ^mllow^ 
he  will  cohabit  with  women  under  prohibition  ; and  if  dry, 
he  will  be  poor. 

4L  If  the  nail  resemble  the  husk  of  paddj",  the  person 
will  be  a hermaphrodite  ; if  flat  and  split,  he  will  be  poor  ; 
if  of  bad  color,  he  will  be  of  wrong  views  ; and  if  red,  he  will 
be  a king. 

42.  If,  in  the  middle  of  the  tlinmh,  there  be  lines  of 
the  shape  of  a barley,  the  person  will  be  rich  3 if  the  same 
be  found  at  the  root  of  the  thumb,  ho  will  have  sons.  If 
the  joints  of  the  fingers  be  long,  the  person  will  be  popular 
and  will  live  Ions’. 

C3 

« 

43.  If  the  lines  in  the  palm  of  the  hand  be  glossy  and 
.deep,  the  man  wdll  be  rich ; if  otherwise,  ho  will  be  poo^” 


\JH.  21.] 


BGIHAT  SAMHITA. 


?G5 

if  thefinprers  bo  not  close,  the  person  will  be  poor;  and  if 
close,  he  will  earn  much  money. 

41.  If  the  three  lines  issuing  from  the  wrist  reach 
the  middle  of  the  palm,  the  person  v»dll  be  a king,  and  if 
there  be  two  marks  of  the  shape  of  the  fish  in  the  middle  of 
tho  palm,  the  person  will  daily  feed  man}^  people. 

.45.  If  the  lines  .in  the  palm  be  of  the  shape  of  va]- 
rayudha,  the  person  will  be  rich  ; if  they  be  of  the  shape  of 
the  tail  of  the  fish,  he  will  be  learned  ; if  of  the  shape  of  a 
conch  shell,  an  umbrella,  a palankin,  an  elephant,  a horse 
or  a lotus,  the  person  will  be  a king. 

46..  If  the  lines  in  the  palm  of  the  hand  be  of  the 
shape  of  a pot,  the. stem  of  a lotus,  a flag  or  the  hook  of  the 
elephant  driver,  the  person  will  be  a guardian  of  treasure. 
If  the  lines  appear  twisted  like  a rope,  or  if  the  lines  b® 
triangular  iu  shape,  the  person  will  be  rich. 

47.  If  the  lines  in  the  palm  of  the  hand  be  of  the 
shape  of  the  discus,  the  sword,  the  axe,  the  club,  the  spear 
or  the  bow,  the  person  will  be  a commander  of  armies;  if 
the  lines  be  of  the  shape  of  a mortar,  the  person  will  per- 
form sacrificial  fire  cei'emonies. 

48.  If  the  lines  in  the  palm  of  the  hand  be  of  tho 
shape  of  a crocodile,  a flag,  or  a cow^-shed,  the  person  will  be 
very  rich  ; if  the  hues  at  the  root  of  the  thumb  be  of  the 
shape  of  a Vedi  (sacrificial  altar),  the  person  will  perform 
sacrificial  rites. 

49.  If  the  lines  in  the  palm  of  the  hand  be  of  the 
shape  of  a tank,  a temple  and  the  like,  or  if  they  be  trian- 
gular in  shape,  the  person  will  do  acts  of  charity.  The  big 
lines  below  the  thumb  indicate  sous  and  the  small  lines 
daughters.^ 

50.  Lines  reaching  the  root  of  the  forefinger  indicate 
the  age  of  the  person  to  be  100;  if  th®  line  be  of  shorter 

14 


106 


BEIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  21. 


length,  the  age  shall  be  ascertained  by  proportion.  If  tlie 
lines  be  broken,  the  person  will  fall  from  a tree ; if  there  be 
either  many  lines  or  no  lines,  the  person  will  be  poor. 

5L  If  the  clvin  be  very  small  and  long^  the  person 
■will  be  poor ; if  covered  v/ith  fleshy  he  will  be  rich  j if  the 
lower  lip  be  red  and  straight,  the  person  will  be  a king ; and 
if  small  he  will  be  poor. 

52.  If  the  Ups  be  split  or  appear  cut  or  of  bad  color  or 
dry,  the  person  will  be  poor.  If  the  teeth  be  gloss}^,  close, 
sharp  and  regular,  the  person  will  be  happy. 

53.  If  the  tongue  be  red,  long,  smooth  and  even,  the 
person  will  live  in  comfort  j but  if  it  be  white  or  black  and 
dry,  he  will  bo  poor;  the  same  remarks  apply  to  the  corner  s 
of  the  nnonth. 

BI.  If  the  face  be  beautiful,  slightly  open-mouthed 
clear,  smooth  and  even,  the  person  will  be  a king  ; and  if 
otherwise,  be  will  be  afflicted  with  grief  ; if  the  face  be 
large,  the  person  will  be  happy. 

55.  If  the  face  be  like  that  of  a woman,  the  person 
will  have  no  sons  ; if  it  be  round,  he  will  be  a cheat ; if  long, 
poor;  and  if  timid,  wicked. 

56.  If  the  face  be  obloogular  in  shape,  the  person  will 
be  a cheat ; if  depressed  or  sunk,  he  will  have  no  sons  ; if 
very  small,  a miser ; and  if  full  and  beautiful,  happy. 

57.  If  the  hair  about  the  face  be  not  split  at  the  ends 
be  soft,  and  bent,  the  person  will  be  happj^ ; and  if  it  be 
red,  not  glossy  and  small  in  quantity,  the  person  will  be  a 
hief. 

58.  If  the  ears  bo  without  flesh,  the  person  will  die 
an  unuatnral  death  ; if  like  a cup,  he  will  live  in  comfort; 
if  small,  he  will  be  a miser  ; and  if  they  taper  in  a point  like 
(a  cone^  the  person  will  be  a king. 


CH.  21.] 


EEITIAT  SASrillTA. 


107 


08.  If  tlie  ears  be  covered  witli  hair,  tlie  person  will 
live  long ; if  they  be  broad,  he  will  be  rich  ; if  covered  with 
muscles,  he  wbll  be  wicked  ; and  if  they  hang  and  be  fleshy_, 
he  will  live  well. 

60.  If  the  c/ieeJv  be  not  sunk^  the  person  will  live  in 
comfort ; if  it  be  fleshy,  he  will  become  a minister.  If  tb© 
nose  be  like  that  of  the. parrot,  the  person  will  live  in  com- 
fort ; and  if  it  be  dry,  he  will  live  long. 

61.  If  the  nose  appear  as  if  cut,  the  person  will  cohabit 
with  women  under  prohibition,*  if  it  be  long,  he  will  be 
wealthy  ; if  bent,  he?  will  be  a thief  ,*  and  if  flat,  he  will  ba 
killed  by  a woman.  ' 

62.  If  the  end.  of  the  nose  be  bent,  the  person  will  be 
rich  ,*  if  it  be  bent  on  the  right  side,  he  will  be  wicked  and 
gluttonous;  and  if  it  be  straight,  with  small  holes  and  ap- 
pear beautiful,  the  person  will  be  wealthy. 

63.  If  the  sneeze  occur  twice  or  thrice  at  a time 
and  the  sound  be  not  disagreeable,  the  person  will  be  rich  ; 
and  if  it  be  long  and  of  the  same  sound  throughout,  he  will 
live  long. 

64.  If  the  eyes  be  like  the  petals  of  the  lotus,  the 

person  will  be  rich ; and  if  the  corners  be  red,  lie  will  be 
wealthy  and  prosperous  ; if  of  the  color  of  honey,  he  will 
be  exceedingly  rich;  and  if  they  resemble  the  eyes  of  the 
cat,  the  person  will  be  wicked. 

65.  If  the  e s be  like  those  of  the  deer  or  round  or 
squint,  the  person  will  be  a thief  ; if  they  see  obliquely,  he 
will  be  wicked ; and  if  they  be  like  the  eyes  of  the  elephant, 
the  person  will  be  a king. 

66.  If  the  eyes  indicate  courage,  the  person  will  be 
I’icb;  if  they  be  of  the  color  of  the  blue  lotus,  he  will  be 
]o  irncd  ; and  if  the  e^ms  be  exceedingly  black,  the  person 
will  become  blind. 


108 


BKIHA^P  SAHHITl. 


[€H.  2I*» 


67.  If  tHe  eyes  be  large,  tbe  person  will  be  a minister"; 
if  red-blacky  he  will  be  wealthy  ; if  they  appear  to  be^jmeek 
and  imploring,  the  person  will  be  poor;  and  if  glossy,  he 
will  be  very  rich  and  will  live  in  comfort. 

68.  If  the  hrows  be  high  and  not  broad,  the  person 
will  die  early  ; if  high  and  broad,  he  will  live  in  comfort ; if 
both  brows  be  not  alike,  the  person  will  be  poor;  and  if 
the}^  be  bent  like  the  young  moon,  he  will  be  rich. 

69.  If  the  brows  be  long  and  do  not  meet,  the  person 
will  be  rich  ; if  they  appear  broken,  he  will  be  poor  ; and 
if  they  be  bent  in  the  middle,  he  will  cohabit  with  women 
under  prohibition. 

70.  If  the  temples  be  high  and  broad,  the  person  will 
be  rich  ; and  if  sunk,  he  will  have  neither  sons  nor  money. 
If  the  fore-head  he  not  even,  the  person  will  be  poor  ; and  if 
it  be  like  the  half  moon,  he  will  be  rich, 

71.  If  the  fore-head  be  like  the  pearl  oyster  and 
broad,  the  person  will  be  a preceptor  ; if  covered  with 
muscles,  he  will  be  wicked  and  if  the  muscles  be  high  and 
triangular  in  shape,  he  will  be  rich. 

72.  If  the  fore-head  be  low,  the  person  will  be  assassi- 
nated or  put  in  prison  and  will  be  addicted  to  cruel  deeds  ; 

it  be  high,  he  will  be  a king  ; and  if  narrow,  he  will  be 
poor. 

73.  If  the  iveeping  be  without  tears,  agreeable  to  the 
ear  and  not  of  aii  imploring  nature,  the  person  will  be 
happy  ; if  otherwise,  he  will  be  miserable. 

74.  If  the  laughter  be  unattended  by  the  motion  of 
the  body,  the  person  will  be  happy  ; if  it  be  attended  by 
the  closing  of  the  eyes,  he  will  be  wicked  ; if  it  be  of  fre- 
quent cccurrence,  he  will  be  happy  ; and  if  it  be  repeated  at 
the  end,  he  will  become  mad. 

75.  If  there  be  three  long  lines  in  the  forehead  the 


Off.  21.] 


BEIIIAT  SAWniTA. 


my 


person  will  live  for  100  years  ; if  four  lines,  e will  be  a 
king  and  will  live  for  95  years. 

7G.  If  the  lines  be  broken^  the  ])erson  will  cohabit 
with  a woman  under  prohibition  ; if  there  be  no  lines  in  the 
forehead,  he  will  live  for  90  years  j and  if  the  lines  be  near 
the  hair  of  the  head,  he  wdll  live  for  80  years. 

77.  If  there  be  five  lines  in  the  forehead,  his  age  will 
be  70  ; if  the  lines  be  of  the  same  length,  his  age  will  be 
sixty  ; if  there  be  many  lines,  the  age  will  be  50  j and  if  the 
lines  be  bent,  it  will  be  40. 

V 

% 

78.  If  the  lines  in  the  forehead  be  in  contact  with 
the  brows,  the  age  will  be  SO  ; if  they  be  bent  on  the  left 
side,  it  will  bo  20  ,"-if  short,  the  person  will  meet  with 
early  death.  If  the  lines  be  imperfect,  the  age  shall  be 
ascertained  by  proportion. 

79.  If  the  head  be  round,  the  person  will  possess  many 
cows  ; if  it  be  broad  and  round  like  an  umbrella,  he  will  be  a 

king  ; if  flat,  he  will  lose  his  parent  w^hen  young  ; and  if 
long,  he  will  live  long. 

80.  If  the  head  be  like  a pot,  the  person  will  be  fond 
of  meditation  ; if  it  appear  as  if  two  heads  were  joined  to- 
gether, he  will  be  poor  and  wicked  j if  sunk,  he  will  be  a 
great  man  j and  if  exceedingly  sunk,  he  will  meet  with 
rum. 

81.  If  the  hair  of  the  head  grow  singl}",  be  glossy,  black, 
curling,  with  no  split  ends,  soft,  and  not  too  much  in 
quantity,  the  person  will  live  in  great  comfort  or  will 
be  a king. 

82.  If  the  hairs  grow  several  together  and  if  they  be 
not  of  the  same  length  or  be  of  brown  color  or  thick,  split 
at  the  ends,  not  glossy,  short,  curling  too  much  and  too 
much  in  quantity,  the  person  will  be  poor. 

8v.  If  the  limbs  be  of  disagreeable  appearance  with- 


beiiiat  samhita. 


[ciT,  2l. 


out  fJesli  and  covered^over  witb^mnscles/tlie  person  will  be 
UQbappy  ; and  if  otherwise:,  happy. 

8i.  To  be  a king  three  places*  must  be  broad,  three 
things  must  be^  deep  or  high,  six  places  liigh,  four  small, 
seven  red,  five  Ion  gland  five  soft,  as  follows  : — 

85.  The  breast,  the  forehead  and  the  face  mustbe  broad; 
the  navel,  the  voice  and  strength  must  be  deep  or  high. 

86.  The  breast,  arm-pit,  nails,  nose,  face  and  the  nape 
of  the  neck  must  be^high  ; the  penis,  the  back,  the  neck  and 
the  shanks  must  be  short. 

87.  The  corners  of  the  eyes,  soles  of  feet,  palm  of  the 
hand,  the  corners  of  the  mouth,  the  lower  lip,  the  upper  lip 
and  the  tongue  must  be  red.  Teeth,  fingers,  hair  of  the 
head,  the  skin  and  nails  must  be  soft  or  smooth. 

88.  The  mouth,  the  eyes, the  arms,  the  nose  and  the  part 
between  the  nipples  must  be  long. 

JJ. — Comj>lexion.  (a) 

89.  Complexion  in  man,  animals  and  birds  is  detected 
by  persons  learned  in  the  matter  and  indicate  both  good  and 
evil,  and  is  like  a lamp  placed  within  a crystal  vessel  throw- 
ing its  light  on  the  objects  around. 

90.  The  complexion  discernible  in  shining  teeth 
shin,  nails  and  hairs  of  the  body  and  of  the  head  will  be 
attended  with  good  smell  if  it  be  caused  by  the  element 
of  earth.  It  will  make  the  person  happy,  rich,  prosperous 
and  virtuous. 

91.  The  complexion  which  is  glossy,  white,  clear’ 
green  and  agreeable  to  look  at  is  caused  by  the  element  of 
water  ; it  will  rnakej^all  creatures  possessing  it  happy  and 
cuccessful  in  all  their  attempts  and  will  produca  wealth, 
OLiifort,  luxury  and  prosperity. 

92.  The  complexion  which  indicates  fear  n~d  is  un- 


{a).  Tide  nctc  at  the  end. 


cii.  2].] 


BRTHAT  SAMiriTA. 


Ill 


bearable  and  of  the  color  of  the  lotus,  gold  or  fire,  and  wbicli 
also  indicates  strengtli,  power,  and  valor,  is  caused  by  tho 
element  of  fire. 

93.  Tbe  complexion  winch  is  diriy,  not  glossy,  black 
and  of  bad  odoui’  is  caused  by  the  clement  of  air.  It  will 
cause  to  tlie  person  death  or  imprisonment^  disease,  ruin 
and  loss  of  wealth.  The  com|)lexion  which  is  of  the  coloyof 
the  ciystal,  noble,  clear  and  indicatitig  wealth  and  genero- 
sity, is  caused  by  the  element  of  ether  (Akas).  It  will  give  a 
person  all  that  ho  desires. 

94.  Thus  has  been  described  the  complexion  caused 
by  the  elements  of  earth,  water,  fii-e,  air,  and  akas — live  in 
number.  Some  writers  treat  of  five  more  complexions  caused 
by  the  Sun,  Vishnu,  lindra,  Yama  and  the  Moou,  and  they 
have  described  in'detaiUthe  properties  of  each. 

Notes., 

Ph3"sical  man  isyomposed  of  the  five  elementaiy  princi- 
ples— earth,  water,  fire,  air  and  akas.  The  lords  of^des® 
are  respectively  Mercury  (earth),  Venus  and  the  Moon 
(water).  Mars  and  the  SLmJ(fire),  SaturV(air),  and  Ju|)iter 
(akas).  Human*  life  is  divided,  into  a number  of  Das  a 
periods  presidedjoveiiby  tho 'several  planets  (vide  Chapter 
VIII  of  fiBrihat  ^Jataka).  yin  Vlie  period  of  a particular 
planet  will  predominate  ^ the  elementary  "principle  belong- 
ing to  him,  a nd^, therefore  the  complexion  due  to.  such  prin- 
ciple will  become  discernible  in  such  Dasa  period.  Snppos  o 
the  Dasa  period  to  be  that  of  Mars,  his  element  is  fire;  the 
complexion  caused  by  the  elementary  principle  of  fire  is 
described  in  stanza  93.  This  complexion  will  become  dis- 
cernble  in  the  Dasa  period  of  Mars and  soj'or  the  other 
planets. 

Again,  iVstanza  21  of  Cli.  VIII  of  his  Brihat  Jataka^ 
Varaha  Miliira  states  that  the  complexion  will  be  accompa- 
zfied  by  certain  other  qualities  duo  to  the  five  elementary 


112 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  21. 

principles  and  discernible  by  their  respective  organs  of  sense. 
The  main  property  of  earth  is  smell,  a quality  discernible 
by  the  nose  ; that  of  water  is  taste,  a quality  discernible  by 
the  tongue  ; that  of  tiro  or  light  is  shape  or  appearance,  dis- 
cernible by  the  eye;  that  of  the  air  is  touch,  discernible  by 
the  body  ; and  that  of  akas  is  sound,  discernible  by  the  ear. 
Now  suppose  the  Dasa  period  to  be  that  of  Venus.  His 
element  is  water;  the  quality  belonging  to  water  is  taste, 
discernible  by  the  tongue;  therefore  in  the  Dasa  period  of 
Venus,  the  person  will  eat  juicy  meals  according  to  his 
desire.  Again,  suppose  the  Dasa  period  to  be  that  of  Jupi- 
ter, his  elementaiy  principle  is  Akas;  its  propert3M's  sound, 
discernible  by  the  ear  ; the  person’s  speech  will  be  sweet  and 
agreeable  to  the  ear.  In  the  Dasa  period  of  Mercury  (earth, 
smell)  the  person’s  body  will  be  with  an  agreeable  odour ; in 
the  period  of  Mars  (fire,  sight),  he  will  be  of  agreeable  appear- 
ance, and  in  that  of  Saturn  (air,  touch),  he  will  be  of  soft 
body.  From  these  the  particular  Dasa  period  of  a person 
may  be  ascertained. 

III.— Voice. 

95.  If  the  voice  be  like  the  sound  of  the  elephant,  the 
bull,  the  chariot,  the  drum,  the  lion  or  the  clouds,  the  per- 
son will  be  a king ; but  if  it  be  hoarse  and  rough  like  the 
braying  of  the  ass,  the  person  will  be  poor  and  unhappy. 

JV.—  Strength. 

96.  Strength  consists  in  seven  things — in  the  serum  of 
flesh,  the  marrow  of  bones,  the  skin,  bones,  semen,  blood 
and  flesh.  We  shall  now  describe  the  properties  of  each. 

97.  If  the  mouth,  lips,  gnm  of  teeth,  tongue,  corners 
of  eyes,  the  anus,  the  hands  and  feet  be  red,  the  person  is 
strong  in  blood  ; he  will  live  in  comfort  and  will  be  married, 
wealthy  and  with  sons. 

98.  If  the  skin  be  glossy,  the  person  will  be  rich ; if 
of,  the  will  ba  liappy  and  prosperous  ; and  if  thin,  intelligent. 


cu.  21.] 


ERIIIAT  SAMIIITA. 


113 


Sacli  a person  will  be  rtrong  in  marrow.'  lie  will  possess  a 
fair  body.  Persons  strong  in  tlie  sorum  of  flesli  will  be  rich 
and  will  liave  sons. 

PO.  If  tlio  bones  be  large;  tbe  person  will  be  strong  in 
bones.  lie  will  bo  strong,  learned  and  beautiful.  If  the 
serum  be  thick  and  much  in  quantit}",  be  will  bo  bapp}^, 
prosperous,  learned  and  beautiful. 

100.  A person  of 'full  growth  will  bo  learned,  rich  and 
beautiful.  lie  will  be  strong  in  flesh. 

P. — Joints. 

If  tlio  joints  bo  close  and  well  fitted,  tbe  person  will 
li^e  in  comfort  and  ease- 

VL— Gloss. 

101.  If  the  five  parts — month,  tongue,  teeth,  eyes  and 
nails  be  glossy,  the  person  will  have  sons  and  will  be  richj 
hapj^y  and  prosperous;  ifebey  be  otherwise,  he  will  be  poor. 

VII’ — Colon 

102.  If  the  color  be  very  bright  and  glossy,  the  person 
will  be  a king ; if  moderately  so,  he  will  be  wealthy  and 
wdll  have  sons;  if  the  color  be -disagreeable  to  the  eye,  he 
will  be  poor;  if  of  a single  color,  lie  will  be  happy  ; and  if 
mixed,  miserable. 

VIII. — TecuHiirity  of  Character. 

103.  The  peculiar  character  of  a person  must  be  ascer- 
tained from  his  face  ; if  the  face  be  like  that  of  the  cow, 
the  ox,  the  tiger,  the  lion  or  the  Prahmini  kite,  he  will  defeat 
his  enemies,  be  successful  in  fight,  and  will  become  a 
king. 

101.  If  the  face  be  like  that  of  the  monkey,  the  buffalo, 
the  liog  or  the  goat,  he  will  have  sons,  will  be  rich  and  will 
live  in  comfort;  and  if  the  face  be  like  that  of  the  ass  or 
the  camel,  the  person  will  be  poor  and  unhappy. 

15 


Briiiat  bamhita. 


[CH.  211* 


114 

IX. ~JIeirjht. 

105.  If  tlie  hciglit  of  the  person  be  108,  96,  or  84  of 
Lis  own  inches  (breadth  of  finger),  he  is  respectively  a supe- 
rior^ an  average  and  an  inferior  man. 

X. — Weight. 

106.  If  the  weight  of  the  body  be  half  a hJiara  or 
80  lbs._,  the  person  will  live  in  comfort;  if  less^  he  will  be 
alFiicted  with  grief  ; if  the  weight  be  a bhara  (IGO  ibs);  he 
Yv'ill  be  rich  ; and  if  it  bo  a bhara  and  a Lalf  (240  lbs},  he  wfili 
be  an  emperor. 

107.  The  measurement  of  both  height  and  weight  is 
to  be  taken  a.t  the  age  of  20  in  the  case  of  women  and  25  in 
the  case  of  men^  or  it  may  be  done  in  the  last  quarter  of 
life. 

XI. — Innate  Dicposition. 

108.  Man  is  of  the  nature  of  the  earthy  water;,  fire, 
wind,  akas  (ether),  the  Devas,  the  Naras,  or  the  animals  and 
birds,  We  shall  describe  each. 

109.  A person  of  the  nature  of  earth  will  be  of  the 
odour  of  good  flowers,  will  indulge  in  sexual  intercourse, 
and  will  be  of  good  breeding  and  of  firm  mind.  A person 
of  the  nature  ofw^ater,  will  drink  much  water,  will  be  fond 
of  women  and  will  eat  juicy  meals. 

110.  A person  of  the  nature  of  fire  will  be  hasty  and 
thoughtless,  wicked  and  cruel,  angiy,  hungry  and  glut- 
tonous. A person  of  the  nature  of  the  wind  will  be  fickle- 
minded,  thin  and  of  irascible  temper. 

111.  A person  of  the  nature  of  Akas  wdll  bo  able, 
open-mouthed,  skilled  in  a knowledge  of  sound  and  with 
holes  in  his  limbs.  A person  of  the  nature  of  the  Davas, 
will  be  liberal  in  gifts,  slightly  angry  and  attached  to  frieuds. 

112.  A person  of  human  nature  will  be  fond  of  music 
and  jewels  and  inclaioed  tc  share  what  ho  has  with  others^ 


cn.  22.] 


Erjn.4.T  SAMHITA. 


115 


113.  A person  of  tho  natiiro  of  a Rakshasa  will  bo 
exceedingly  aiigry^  wicked  and  sinful.  A person  of  tbo 
nature  of  a Pisaclia  (devil)  will  be  hasty,  thoughtless,  dirty 
and  talkative  and  of  a largo  body. 

114.  A person  of  the  nature  of  animals  and  birds 
will  be  timid,  hungry  and  gluttonous.  Thus  tho  learned 
have  described  the  Satwa  quality  of  a man  and  this  quality 
is  also  known  as  Prakriii — nature. 

‘ XIL^Gait. 

115.  If  tho  gait  bo  like  that  of  the  tiger,  tho  swan, 
the  elephant  in  rut, ^he  bull  or  the  peacock,  the  person  will 
be  a king.  If  the.  gait  be  noiseless  and  slow;,  the  person 
will  be  rich  • and  if'it  be  fast  and  skipping,  he  will  be  poor, 

lid.  CT0nerally,  a person  who  has  opportunities  of 
walking  out  when  suffering  from  ennni,  of  drinking  when 
thirsty,  and  of  protection  when  in  fear,  is  cousiderod  by 
those  learned  iti  the  lore  as  exceedingly  happy. 

Il7.  Thus  liavo  I described  brieflv  the  features  and 

•/ 

qiialities  of  man  on  examining  tlio  views  of  Rishis.  lie 
who  studios  this  will  be  liked  universally  and  will  be  honor- 
ed by  the  king. 

CTIAPTEU  XXII.  (C9). 

Ox  THE  FIVE  MAIIAPEIiUSHAS  OE  GrEAT  aIeX. 

1.  Five  Maliapurushas  or  eminent  men  will  be  born 
when  the  five  planets  from  Mars  to  Saturn  are]  powerful 
and  oCGup}^  their  houses,  exaltation  signs  or  the_ Kendra 
houses.  I shall  now  describe  them. 

2.  If  the  powerful  planet  be  Jupiter,  the  person  boru 
is  known  as  Ilamsa ; if  Saturn  bo  powerful,  the  person  horn 
is  known  as  Sasa ; if  Mars,  he  is  knowm  as  ^^ucJialca;  if 
Mercury,  ho  is  known  as  Bhccdra  i and  if  Yeiius,  hois 
known  as  Malavya, 


116 


BIUIIAT  samhita. 


[cn.  22. 


3.  If  the  Sun  be  powerful,  the  body  will  be  strong ; 
and  if  the  Moon  be  powerful,  the  mind  will  be  strong.  The 
Mahapurushas  will  be  of  the  nature  of  the  houses  occupied 
by  the  powerful  Sun  or  the  Moon. 

4.  They  will  be  of  the  nature  of  the  houses  occupied 
by  the  pow’^erful  Sun  or  Moon  in  point  of  gloss;  color,  shape, 
strength  and  the  like  ; if  the  Sun  or  the  Moon  be  not  pow- 
erful at  the  time  of  birth,  the  person  is  known  as  Sanhir- 
napurusJia> 

5.  If  at  the  time  of  birth.  Mars  be  powerful,  the  per- 
son will  be  very  strong;  if  Mercury  be  powerful,  he  will 
be  very  heavy  ; if  .Jupiter,  he  will  possess  a good  voice  ; if 
Venus,  he  will  be  of  glossy  appearance;  and  if  Saturn  be 
powerful,  the  person  will  be  of  good  color.  If  none  of  the 
planets  be  powerful,  he  will  possess  very  little  of  the  qualities 
described  above. 

6.  The  Saukirnapurushas  will  not  become  kings,  but 
will  enjoy  ease  and  comfort  in  the  Dasa  period  of  the  most 
powerful  planet.  Sankirnapurnshas  are  of  five  sorts  accord- 
ing as  the  most  powerful  planet  occupies  an  iuirnical  sign, 
a depression  sign,  a position  beyond  the  exaltation  sign  or 

aspected  by  a benefic  or  a malefic  planet. 

7.  The  Hamsapurnsha  is  96  inches  high  or  of  the 
height  of  the  length  of  the  two  arms  stretched  horizontally, 
and  the  remaining  4 persons — the  Sasa,  the  Ruchaka,  the 
Bhadra^and  the  Malavya  purushas — are  each  successively 
three  inches  taller  than  the  one  above  him. 

8.  If  the  Satwaguna  (good  temper)  predominate  in 
a person  he  will  be  merciful,  firm-minded,  strong,  sincere 
and  with  a due  regard  for  Brahmins.  If  the  Rajo-guna  or 
passionate  temper  predominate  in  a person,  ho  v/ill  bo 
a poet;  learned  iu  the  various  arts,  will  perform  sacri- 


117 


Cir.  22.]  BRIUAT  SAM  II  IT  A. 

Ccliil  riteS;  w’.ll  bo  fond  of  women  and  will  be  bold  and 
courageous. 

9.  If  the  Tatno-gaua  or  dark  temper  predominate  in 
a person,  lie  will  bo  deceitful,  ignorant,  idle,  angry  and 
sleepy.  If  the  three  gunas  be  variously  mixed  in  a person, 
there  will  bo  four  more  dUtinctions — or  seven  disiiuct  elia- 
racters  in  all. 

10.  A Malavva  puruslia  will  have  arms  resembling 
tlie  trunk  of  the  elepliant  with  fleshy  joints,  a smooth  and 
beautiful  body,  narrow  loins,  face  13  inches  long,  the  space 
between  the  root  of  the  nose  to  the  centre  of  the  ear  holes 
10  inches  long*,  bright  eyes,  beautiful  cheek,  white  even 
teeth  and  the  two  lip^s  without  much  tlesh. 

11.  He  will  rule  over  Malwa,  Baroach,  Surat,  Lata, 
Sindh  and  countries  extending  to  the  Parivatra  mountains 
and  will  be  master  of  much  self-earned  wealth. 

12.  He  will  live  to  the  age  of  70  years  and  will  die 
in  water.  Thus  have  I described  fully  the  character  of  the 
Malav^ui  puruslia,  and  T shall  now  proceed  to  describe  the 
character  of  the  four  other  purushas. 

13.  The  Bhadra  purusha  has  large,  round,  equal  and 
liano^iiig  arms,  is  of  tho  height  of  the  two  arms  stretched 
and  has  cheeks  covered  with  thin,  soft  and  close  hairs. 

14.  The  Bhradra  purusha  will  be  strong  in  skin  and 
semen,*  his  breast  will  be  broad  and  largo,*  the  Satwa- 
guna  will  predominate  in  him  ,*  ho  will  have  the  face  of  the 
tiger  and  will  be  firm-minded,  patient,  charitable,  grate- 
ful, with  the  gait  of  an  elephant  and  vastly  learned. 

15.  He  will  be  a man  of  great  intelligence,  of  fine 
bod}^  forehead,  frontal  bones,  belly  and  nose;  will  bo 
learned  in  tbe  arts,  courageous,  with  the  hands  and  feet  of 
the  color  of  the  inside  of  the  lotus,  will  live  in  ease  and 

couifort  and  will  have  brows  close  and  alike. 


ITS 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  22. 


16.  The  hairs  of  liis  head  will  bo  of  the  smell  of  the 
earth  just  made  wet,  of  fragrant  leaves^  of  satiroii,  of  the 
I’uice  of  the  elephant  in  rat  and  of  the  fragrant  tree  of 
Agaru(a)  ; they  will  be  found  to  grow  singly  and  in  curls; 
his  genital  organ  will  be  hid  from  view  like  that  of  the 
horse  or  elephant. 

17.  In  Jiis  hands  and  feet  will  be  found  lines  of  the 
shape  of  the  plough,  the  pestle,  the  club,  the  conch-shell, 
the  discus,  the  elephant,  the  shark,  a lotus  or  a chariot, 
llis  wealth  is  open  to  the  enjoyment  of  all  classes  of  peo- 
])]e;  but  he  will  not  help  his  own  kinsmen  and  will  ever  be 
inclined  to  follow  his  own  independent  views. 

18.  He  will  be  84  inches  high  and  will  be  160  lbs.  in 
weight,  and  will  rule  over  Madh3mdesa.  If  three  planets 
be  powerful  at  the  time  of  his  birth,  he  will  rule  over  all 
countries. 

19.  After  ruling  over  countries  acquired  by  himself, 
the  Bhadra  purusha  will  die  at  the  age  of  80  in  water  and 
will  reach  Swarga. 

20.  The  Sasa  purusha  will  have  a slightly  uueveu 
head,  small  teeth  and  nails,  projecting  eyes,  a swift  gait, 
•will  be  skilled  iu  metallurgy  and  in  trade,  will  have  large 
cheeks,  will  be  deceitful,  will  be  a commander  of  artuios, 
will  be  fond  of  sexual  union,  and  will  covet  the  wives  of  other 
men,  will  ever  be  moving,  wdl  be  valiant  and  dutiful  to  his 
mother,  and  will  be  fond  of  forests,  mountains,  rivers  and 
places  unfrccpented  by  man. 

21.  He  will  be  92  inches  high ; will  do  deeds  wirh 
fear  and  suspicion  ; will  know  the  tricks  of  other  men;  will 
bo  strong  in  marrow;  will  be  of  a retiring  nature  and  will 
not  bo  very  heavy. 

22.  In  his  hands  and  feet  will  be  found  lines  of  tlie 

.AiJiyria  AgallOvLa, 


CTT.  22.] 


BRinAT  SAirniTA. 


119 


sluipo  of  tliG  targeio  sv/orcl^  cot,  gai-lanJ,  drum,  trident 
as  well  as  vertical  lines. 

23.  IIo  will  either  rule  over  the  Mlechas  or  will  be  a 
provincial  governor.  He  will  die  at  the  age  of  70  after  suffer- 
ing fi'om  d3^senter3g  bellj^-ache,  and  personal  disgrace. 

2 1'.  The  TIainsa  purnslia’s  cheek  will  be  large  and  red  ; 
his  nose  will  be  high  and  face  of  the  color  of  gold;  his 
liead  will  be  round  ; hisej^es  will  be  of  brown  color;  the 
nails  red  ; the  lines  in^the  hands  and  feet  of  the  shape  of  a 
garland,  a string,  the  elephant  drirer’s  hook  the  conch-shell, 
two  fish,  the  Yupa(a),  a pot  or  a lotus  flower,  the  nails  will 
be  perfect,  the  feet  'beautiful  and  oi’gans  of  sense  bright 
and  full.  i 

25.  He  will  indulge  in  water-sports,  will  be  strong  in 
semen,  will  be  1,C00  palas  (!281bs)  in  weight  and  96  inches 
in  height. 

o 

26.  He  will  rule  over  the  countries  of  Khasa,  Surasena 
aud  Candahar  and  the  regions  between  the  Jumna  and  the 
Ganges,  and  will  die  in  forest  at  the  age  of  90. 

27.  Ruchaka  purasha  will  have  beautiful  browns,  and 
liairs  on  his  head  and  will  be  red-black  ; his  neck  will  be 
like  tlie  conch-shell  and  his  head  will  be  long  j he  will  be 
valiant  and  cruel ; v/ill  be  an  excellent  minister  or  the  chief 
of  thieves  and  will  be  a good  g3^mnast. 

28.  Ilis  loins  will  be  as  broad  as  his  face  is  long  : his 
bod}^  will  be  bright;  he  will  be  strong  in  flesh,  will  destroy 
his  enemies  and  do  deeds  in  a determined  mannei-. 

29.  The  lines  in  his  hand  and  feet  will  be  of  the  shape 
of  a club,  a lyre,  a bull,  a bow,  a vajrayudha,  a spear,  the 
moon  or  the  trident ; he  will  respect  the  Brahmins  aud  the 
Bavas  ; will  be  100  inches  high  and  1,000  palas  (80  lbs)  i^^ 
weight. 

(a.)  Ynpa  : aii  eight-sided  post  in  sacrificial  rites  to  -whicli  tliG 
animal  to  be  sacrificed  is  tied. 


120 


r.DIHAT  SAMIIITA. 


SO.  lie  will  be  skilled  in  blnck  magic;  bis  sbanksand 
ankles  will  be  tbin  ; lie  will  rule  over  the  countries  borderino- 
on  tiie  Yinda^ni  and  Sabya  mountains  and  over  Oojieiij  and 
will  die  at  tlie  age  of  70  by  veeapons  or  bj'  fire. 

31.  The  Sankirna  purusbas  are  of  five  classes  known 
as  tbe  Vamanalca,  the  Jaghanya,  tbe  Kuhja^  the  MandalaJca, 
and  the  Sami  j they  will  serve  severally  under  tbe  fiv^e 
Maba  purusbas.  1 will  now  proceed  to  describe  tbem. 

32.  d’be  Yamanaka  pnrusba  w'ill  have  perfect  limbs; 
Ins  back  will  be  bent;  bis  bps^  armpits  and  body  wdll  be 
large  ; be  will  be  aknan  of  renown  ; be  will  be  generous  and 
a worshipper  of  Yisbnip  and  be  will  serve  under  tbe  Bbadra 
purusba. 

83.  Tbe  Jagbanva  pnrusba  wn’ll  serve  under  tbe  Mala- 

piu'usba;  bis  ears  ;^will  be  semi-circular  in  J^sbape  ; bis 
joints  will  be  strong  ; be  will  be  strong  in  semen  ; and  will 
be  a tale-bearer,  a poet  of  disagreeable  appearance  and  of 
large  fingers. 

o o 

34.  He  will  be  ]dcb,  crnel  and  of  dull  intellect ; be  will 
ridicule  other  men ; tbe  lines  in  liis  land,  feet  and  breast  wdll 
be  of  the  shape  of  a sword,  a spear,  a string  or  an  axe. 

85.  The  IvLibja  purusba  will  serve  under  tbe  Ilamsa 
purusba;  be  will  be  a pure  man  ; tbe  parts  below  bis  loins 
will  be  thin  ; tbe  front  part  of  bis  body  will  be  bent  forw’ard  ; 
lie  will  be  an  atheist ; be  will  be  rich,  learned,  and  valiant  ; 
wdil  carry  tales  and  will  be  grateful. 

36.  He  will  be  learned  in  tbe  various  arts  and  fond 
of  fight ; be  will  have  numej‘Ous  servants  and  wdll  be 
subject  to  female  influence;  be  will  give  up  bis  connection 
with  eminent  men  for  no  apparent  cause  and  wdll  be  of  active 
kabits. 

37.  The  Mandalalaka  punisbaiwill  serve  urideu  the 


cii.  2o.] 


BRIUAT  SAillllTA. 


Iril 

liacluika  puiusha  and  will  be  skilled  in  black  iiingdc, 
witclicrafc  and  spirtlore  botli  practically  and  tkeoretically. 

38.  He  will  appear  like  an  old  man  with  the  hair  on 
his  head  stiff  and  not  glossy  j he  will  destory  his  enemies 
and  be  subject  to  the  influence  of  women  ; he  will  res[)ect 
the  Brahmins,  the  Devas,  saciiticial  tire  ceremonies  and  the 
practice  of  yoga  and  he  will  also  be  intelligent. 

39.  The  Sami  purusha  will  serve  under  the  Sasa 
])Uiusha  and  will  be  of  the  character  of  his  master;  his 
aj.'pearance  and  coder  will  be  disagreeable;  he  will  b(3 
generous  and  Vvdll  successfully  execute  every  great  deed 
commenced  by  him*, 

CilAPfER  XXIII  (70). 

On  the  Featukes  of  Women. 

1.  He  who  wishes  to  rule  over  countries  shall  many 
a woman  the  nails  of  whose  toes  are  glossy^  high^  thin  and 
red;  whose  ankles  are  large,  beautiful  and  both  alike,  whoso 

toes  are  close  and  the  soles  of  whose  feet  are  of  the  color 
of  the  lotus. 

2.  If  the  lines  in  the  feet  be  of  the  shape  of  the  lislt, 
the  elephant  driver’s  hook,  the  lotus,  barley-grain,  the 
plough  or  the  sword,  or  if  the  feet  be  dry  and  soft,  if  the 
shanks  be  round  and  without  hair  and  visible  muscles,  and 
if  the  knees  be  fleshy  and  both  alike,  the  woman  will  be 
lmpp3-. 

d.  If  the  thighs  be  like  the  trunk  of  the  elephant, 
without  hair  and  Arm,  the  genital  organ  be  broad  and 
triangular  in  shape,  the  part  just  above  it  be  large  and  high 
and  like  the  shell  of  the  turtle,  if  the  glaus  penis  be  hid 
from  view,  the  woman  will  be  wealthy  and  happy. 

4.  If  the  buttocks  be  large,  broad  and  fleshy,  the 
woman  will  wear  a girdle  ; if  tlie  navel  be  broad,  deep  and 
turning  from  loft  to  rig’lit,  sho  will  be  happy. 


EUniAT  SAMHITA, 


[cn.  23. 


JL  i’M 

5.  Iffclie  abdomen  be  without  hair,  with  threo  skin 
folds,  and  if  the  bosoms  be  round,  firm,  large  and  both 
alike,  the  breast  above  it  be  without  hair  and  soft  and  the 
neck  be  like  the  conoh-shell,  the  woman  will  be  wealthy  and 

6.  If  the  lower  lip  be  red  like  the  China  rose,  fleshy, 
.beautiful  and  red  like  the  cherry  fruit,  if  the  teeth  be  even 
and  like  the  buds  of  jasmine,  the  woman  will  enjoy  the 
pleasures  of  married  life  and  will  be  happy. 

7.  If  the  voice  be  sweet,  simple  and  not  meek  and 
like  the  sound  of  the  cuckoo  or  the  swan,  if  the  nose  be 
smooth  and  beautiful  and  the  holes  alike,  and  if  the  eyes  be 
of  the  color  of  tlie  leaves  of  the  blue  lotus,  the  woman  will 
be  happ3’. 

8=  If  the  brows  do  not  meet  and  be  not  very  broad,  if 
they  do  not  hang,  if  they  be  bent  like  the  young  moon,  if 
the  forehead  be  like  the  half  moon,  without  hair  and  even, 
the  woman  will  be  happy. 

9.  If  the  two  ears  be  not  veiy  long,  be  fleshy,  soft  and 
both  alike,  and  if  the  hairs  on  the  head  be  glossy,  black,  soft, 
bent  and  grow  singly,  and  if  the  head  be  even,  the  woman 
•will  be  happy. 

iO.,  If  the  lines  in  the  hands  (a)  and  feet  be  of  the 
shape  of  a pitcher,  a seat,  a horse,  an  elephant,  a chariot, 
the  bilva  tree,  an  eight  sided  post,  an  arrow,  a flower  wreath, 
a pendant,  a charnara,  an  elephant  driver’s  hook,  a barleys 
grain,  a mountain,  flag-staff,  an  arch'way,  a fish,  a cross,  a 
sacrificial  altar,  a fan,  a conch-shell,  an  umbrella  or  a lotus 
flower,  the  woman  will  become  a queen. 

11.  If  the  wrists  be  invisible,  the  hands  be  like  the 
lotus  flower  and  soft,  and  if  the  finger  joints  be  long,  the 

(a)  In  the  case  of  a woman,  the  left  hand  and  in  the  case  of  a man,, 
the  rio'lit  hand,  shall  be  examined. 


cn.  23.] 


BRlrlAT  samhita. 


woman  will  become  a queen  ; if  the  palm  of  the  hand  bo 
neither  deep,  nor  high,  if  it  be  covered  with  benefic  lines, 
the  woman  will  live  long,  leading  a married  life  and  will  have 
sons  j she  will  livo  in  Cornfort_,  bo  wealthy  and  in  the  enjoy- 
ment of  sexual  pleasures. 

12.  If  there  be  found  a line  issuing  from  the  wrist  and 
reaching  the  middle  finger>  or  if  vertical  lines  be  found  in 
the  palm  of  the  hand,  either  the  woman  will  become  a queen 
or  her  husband  will  become  a king. 

13.  If  there  be  found  a line  issuing  from  below  the 
little  finger  and  reaching  a place  between  the  foretinger 
and  the  middle  fingeig  the  Woman  will  live  long;  if  short> 
her  age  will  be  proportionately  short. 

14.  The  big  liifes  below  the  root  of  the  thumb  indicate 
sons,  and  the  small  lines  daughters.  If  the  lines  be  perfect, 
the  children  will  live  long,  and  if  broken  or  short  they  will 
die  early. 

15.  Thus  have  been  described  the  good  features  of 
women  ; the  bad  features  are  the  reverse  of  these.  We  shall 
however  proceed  to  state  briefly  the  more  remarkable  ones. 

16.  If  either  the  little  toe  or  the  one  next  to  it  do  not 
touch  the  ground,  or  if  the  toe  next  to  the  big  toe  be  longer 
than  the  big  toe,  the  woman  will  become  unchaste  and  will 
commit  deeds  of  wickedness. 

17.  If  the  calves  of  the  leg  be  found  to  grow  larger 
as  they  approach  the  knees,  or  if  the  shanks  be  covered  w'ith 
muscles,  without  flesh  or  with  too  much  flesh  or  covered  with 
hair,  if  the  genital  organ  be  sunk,  small,  with  the  hair 
growing  fi'om  right  to  left,  if  the  belly  be  like  a pot,  sho 
will  suffer  grief.  ' 

18.  If  the  neck  be  short,  the  woman  will  be  poor;  if 
very  long,  her  family  will  perish  ; and  if  large  she  vvill  be 
of  angry  temper. 


124 


BIUHAT  SAmIIITA. 


[gh.  23-.' 


19»  If  tlie  eyes  be  wi](^  nnd  disini'bed  and  of  yellow 
color,  or  if  the_y  be  brown  anfl  of  wandering  look,  or  If  dimples 
npponr  in  tbe  cheeks  while  laughing,  tlie  woman  will  become 
unchaste, 

20.  If  the  foreliead  be  low,  the  brother  of  tbe  wom^n^s 
linsband  will  die;  if  tbe  bell}^  be  found  to  bang,  ber  father- 
in-law  \vil]  die;  if  the  buttocks  be  found  to  hang,  her  linsband 
will  die;  if  tbe  upperlip  be  covered  witb  hair  or  if  tbe 
woman  be  taller  than  ber  busband,  sbe  will  suffer  miseries. 

2],  If  tbe  bosoms  be  covered  with  haiip  or  if  they  be 
not  of  bright  appearance,  or  if  they  be  too  large,  or  if  the 
ears  be  not  both  alike,  tbe  woman  will  suffer  grief.  If  the 
teeth  be  large,  uneven  and  of  disagreeable  appearance, 
if  the  gum  be  black,  sbe  will  suffer  miseries  and  be  addicted 
to  thieving, 

22.  If  the  lines  in  the  bands  be  of  the  shape  of  a 
liawk,  a Avolf,  a crow,  a heron,  a serpent,  an  owl,  or  if  tbe 
liands  appear  dried  np,  covered  with  muscles  and  both  not 
alike,  the  woman  will  be  poor  and  miserable. 

2B.  If  the  upper-lip  be  bigb,  if  the  front  lock  be  of 
disagreeable  appearance,  tbe  woman  will  be  quarrelsome; 
Generally  vice  follows  deformity  and  virtue  follows  beauty. 

24.  The  (1)  feet  and  ankles,  (2)  the  shanks  and  knees, 
3)  the  thighs  and  genital  organ,  (4)  tbe  loins  and  tbe 
navel,  (5)  the  belly,  (6)  the  breast  nnd  the  bosoms,  (7)  tbe 
shoulders ( 8)  the  neck  and  the  lips,  (9)  the  eyes  and  the 
brows,  and  (10)  the  forehead  and  the  head  represent  the 
ten  dasa  periods  beginning  from  birth;  so  that  if  a particular 
oi'gan  be  defective,  a person  will  suffer  meseries  in  the  dasa 
pedriod  represented  by  it.  If  the  organ  be  perfect  and 
beautiful,  he  will  be  happy  during  such  period. 


cii.  2‘l.j 


BRIHAT  SAMFIITA. 


]2r) 

Notes. -^120  Years  is  tlie  maximum  Icngtli  of  life  and 
eacli  da«a  period  consists  of  12  years.  If,  for  iosiance, 
there  be  defects  in  the  thighs,  the  person  will  suffer  miseries 
between  tlie  ages  of  24  and  8G. 

CHAPTFR  XXIV  (71.) 

On  Injuries  to  Garments. 

1.  Divide  the  garment  into  nine  rectangles  by  lines 
joining  the  opposite*  poiiits.  of  trisection  of  the  sides.  The 
Devas  occupy  the  four  rectangles  at  the  corners.  The 
Naras  (men)  occupy  the  two  middle  squares  at  the  two  ends, 
and  the  Asuras  occupy  the  three  remaining  central  squares- 
The  same  remarks  apply  to  seats  and  shoes* 

2.  If  the  inner  garment  be  new,  and  if  it  be  disfigured 
wdth  ink,  dung,  mud  and  the  like,  or  if  it  be  cut,  burnt  or 
torn,  the  effects  whether  good  or  bad  will  fully  come  to 
pass;  if  the  injured  garment  be  one  that  has  been  used, 
the  effects  will  bo  slightly  felt;  if  the  garment  be  a decayed 
one,  the  effects  will  be  very  slightly  felt.  If  the  outer 
garment  be  injured,  the  effects  Avill  be  greatly  felt. 

3.  If  the  injury  occur  to  an  Asura  part,  the  person 
will  either  suffer  from  diseases  or  wdll  die;  if  it  occur  to  a 
human  part,  there  wdll  be  birth  of  sons  and  an  improved 
appearance  of  the  body;  if  it  occur  to  a Divine  part,  there 
wdll  be  an  inci’ease  of  comfort*  Generally,  if  the  injur}^  occur 
about  the  edges,  there  will  be  misery. 

4.  If  the  cut  appearing  in  the  divine  parts  of  a garment 
be  of  the  shape  of  a heron,  a duck,  an  owl,  a dove,  a crow,  a 
liawk,  a jackal,  an  ass,  a camel,  or  a snake,  there  will  be 
danger  to  the  life  of  the  person. 

5*  If  the  cut  in  the  Asura  part  of  the  garment  be  of 
the  shape  of  an  umberella,  a banner,  a cross,  a platter,  a 


126 


BRIHAT  SAMFIITA. 


[cm.  24. 


bilva  tree,  a pot,  a lotus  flower,  a flower  wreath,  and 
the  like,  the  person  will  soon  become  wealthy  and  pros- 
perous. 

6.  If  a new  garment  be  worn  when  the  Moon  is  in  the 
asterismof  Aswini,  the  person  will  get  more  garments;  if  it 
be  worn  when  tlie  Moon  is  in  the  asterism  of  Bharani,  he 
will  be  robbed  of  property;  if  when  the  Moon  is  in  the 
asterism  of  Kiittika  there  will  be  fear  from  destructive  fires  ; 
if  when  in  the  asterism  of  Rohini,  there  will  be  acquisition 
of  wealth. 

7.  If  a new  garment  be  worn  \vhen  the  Moon  is  in  the 
asterism  of  Mrigasirsha,  there  will  be  suffering  from  rats  ; 
of  Ardra,  the  person  will  die  3 of  Punarvasu,  there  will  be 
prospeiity  ; if  in  that  of  Pushya  there  will  be  acquisition 
of  wealth. 

8.  If  a new  garment  be  worn  when  the  Moon  is  in  the 
asterism  of  Aslesha,  there  will  be  loss ; of  Magha,  there  will 
be  death ; of  Poorva|)halguni,  there  will  be  fear  from  the 
king  ; of  U-Phalguni,  there  will  be  acquisition  of  wealth. 

9.  If  a new  garment  be  worn  when  the  Moon  is  in  the 
asterism  of  Hasta,  there  will  be  success  in  works  undertaken  ; 
of  Chittra,  there  will  be  prosperity;  of  Swaty,  there  will  be 
prosperity  and  good  meals  ; of  Visakha,  there  will  be 
popularity. 

10.  If  a new  garment  be  worn  when  the  Moon  is  in 
the  asterism  of  Anuradha,  there  will  be  acquisition  of 
friends;  of  J^’eshttha,  the  person  will  get  more  garments, 
of  Moola,  there  will  be  death  by  clrowing  or  seavoyage  3 of 
P-Ashadha,  there  will  be  disease. 

11.  If  a new  garment  be  worn  when  the  Moon  is  in 
the  asterism  of  U-Ashadha,  the  person  wnll  get  good  meals  ; 
of  Sravana,  thei^e  will  be  eye  disease  ; of  Sravishtha,  there 


CiJ.  52.] 


LiilllAT  SAMniTA. 


12?' 


^•ill  be  acquisition  of  graiu  ; of  Satabliishak,  there  will  bo 
much  fear  from  poison. 

12.  If  a new  garment  be  worn  when  the  Moon  is  in  tho 
asterism  of  P.  Proshtapada;,  there  will  be  fear  of  cleat li  by 
drowning  ; of  U.  Proshtapada;,  the  person  will  get  sons;  of 
Pevati,  there  will  be  acquisition  of  gems. 

13  & 14.  A new  garment  presented  by  Bralimins  with 
their  benedictions  or  by  the  king  for  merit  or  on  occasions 
of  marriage,  may  be  worn  irrespective  of  the  position  of  the 
Moon  in  the  lunar  Zodiac  and  the  effects  will  always  be  good. 

Notes. — If  the  injured  garments  be  very  valuable 

i 

silks  and  the  like,,  the  effects  described  will  occur  after 
three  or  six  years  fin  the  case  of  woollen  shawls^  after 
three  years  ; and  in.the  case  of  ordinary  garments  after 
six  months.  According  to  Garga  whether  the  injury  occur 
to  valuable  or  ordinary  garments^  there  shall  be  a reci- 
tation of  Yedic  hymns  by  the  Brahmins;  in  the  case  of 
torn  gai’inentS;,  the  evils  cannot  be  escaped  by  the  sale  of 
tho  garments  ; they  should  be  given  away  to  Brahmins  with 
gold,  in  which  case,  a person  becomes  freed  from  evils. 

CHAPTER  XXV  (72). 

On  Chamara  (a). 

1.  Expressly  for  the  use  made  of  their  tail  the 
Chamari  deer  (Bos  Grunniens)  appears  to  have  been  creat- 
ed in  the  caves  of  the  Himalayas,  the  hair  growing  at  the 
end  of  their  tail  is  either  white  or  black  or  yellow. 

2.  If  the  hair  be  glossy^  much  in  quantity,  soft, 
pure,  white,  and  with  a small  bone  at  the  root,  the 
Cliam  ira  is  one  of  a superior  kind  ; but  if  the  hair  be  knotty, 
split,  broken  or  small  in  quantity,  the  Chamara  will  not 
conduce  to  prosperity^ 

(a).  The  bushy  tail  of  the  Bos  Grunniens  nsed  as  a fan  and  as  obo 
the  insignia  of  royalty. 


]2S 


BRIIiAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  2G. 


3.  The  length  of  the  handle  shall  he  either  a cubit 
and  a half  or  a cubit  or  four  inches  less  than  a cubit.  It 
shall  be  made  of  wood  and  covered  with  gold  or  silver  set 
with  gems  and  precious  stones.  Such  a Chamara  will 
conduce  to  the  prosperity  of  the  king. 

4.  The  beam  or  the  shaft  or  the  handle^  as  the  case 

may  be;,  of  the  lute,  the  umbrella^  the  elephant  driver^s 

hook;,  the  cane,  the  bow,  the  canopy,  shall  be  yellow^  red, 

* 

of  the  color  of  the  honey,  and  black  in  the  case  of  the 
Trahmins,  Kshatryas,  Vysias  and  Sudras  respectively. 

5.  If  the  handle  contain  two,  four,  six,  eight,  ten  or 
twelve  joints,  the  effects  will  respectively  be  the  death  of 
a person’s  mother,  loss  of  lands,  of  weahh  and  of  family, 
disease  or  death. 

6.  If  the  handle  contain  three,  five,  seven,  nine,  eleven, 
or  thirteen  joints,  the  effects  will  respectively  be  success 
in  the  object  of  a journey,  ruin  of  the  enemy,  much  gain, 
acquistion  of  lands,  increase  of  cows  or  the  gain  of  a 
desired  object. 

CHAPTER  XXVI.  (73). 

On  UmbPcEllas. 

1 & 2.  The  king’s  umbrella  shall  be  made  of  the 
feathers  of  the  swan,  the  galliueous  fowl;  the  peacock  and 
the  crane,  covered  with  a new  white  silk  and  hung  with  lines 
of  pearls  all  round;  the  handle  shall  beset  with  crystal; 
the  shaft  shall  be  6 cubits  long,  made  of  gold,  and  shall 
contain  seven  or  nine  joints. 

3.  The  length  of  the  radius  of  the  umbrella  shall  be 
half  the  length  of  the  shaft ; the  several  joints  shall  bo 
firm  and  the  umbrella  shall  be  raised  at  the  centre ; such 
an  umbrella  will  bring  to  the  king  success  and  prosperity. 


CH.  2V.I 


BIMHAT  SAMHITA. 


12D 


4.  Tile  iinibi’ellas  of  the  tivst  priuce^  the  queen,  the 
comtnauder-iri-chief,  and  tlie  niMg’iytrate,  shall  have  shafts  (ii 
cubits  long,  and  shall  be  2-  cubits  bioad. 

5.  ^i’he  umbrellas  to  be  used  by  the  king’s  favourites 
sliall  be  made  of  the  feathers  of  the  peacock  with  its  top 
adorned  with  the  prasada  patta  and  shall  be  hung  with 
lines  of  pearls  all  round-  The  other  umbrellas  shall  consist 
of  four  sides,  and  the  shaft  of  the  umbrella  of  the  Brahmins 
shall  be  round. 


ON  MATTERS  COiNNEOTED  WITH  TOWN  LIFE. 

: I. 

V 

CHAPTER  XXVIL  (7ib 
On  the  PiiAisE  OP  Women. 

1-  In  a country  acquired  by  a king  by  conquest  the 
town  is  the  most  important  place  ,*  in  towns,  houses  are 
important  places;  in  houses^  the  bed  room  is  an  important 
place;  in  it,  the  cot  and  the  bed  are  important,  and  on  it 
a woman  bedecked  with  jewels  forms  the  essence  of  the 
pleasures  of  royalty. 

2.  Gems  derive  beauty  from  women;  women  derive 
no  beauty  from  gems  ; for,  women,  when  without  gems,  are 
lovely  and  provoke  men’s  desires^  and  not  so  gems  when 
alone. 

3.  To  kings  struggling  to  Conceal  their  desires  when 
in  public,  anxious  to  conquer  their  enemies,  meditating  on  a 
hnudi-ed  schemes  of  administration  either  half  executed  or 
not  attempted  at  all,  obliged  to  follow  the  advice  of  their 
ministers,  ever  suspecting  fear  and  failure  in  every  attempt 
and  buried  in  a sea  of  cares  and  anxieties,  the  embrace  of 
an  excellent  woman  is  the  only  bit  of  pleasure  falling  to 
their  lot. 


IT 


130 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH  27- 

4.  In  no  world  has  Brahma  created  a gem  superior 
to  women,  whose  speech,  sight,  touch,  thought,  provoke 
pleasurable  sensations.  Such  a gem  in  the  shape  of  a 
woman  is  the  fruit  of  a person^s  good  deeds,  and  from  such 
a gem  a person  obtains  both  sons  and  pleasure.  A woman 
therefore  resembles  the  goddess  of  wealth  in  a family,  and 
must  be  treated  with  respect,  and  all  her  wants  must  be 
satisfied. 

5.  It  appears  to  me  that  those  are  bad  men  who,  out 
of  a dislike  for  all  things,  speak  ill  of  women,  and  these  men 
are  never  found  to  speak  of  the  vij’tues  of  women. 

6.  Is  there  any  vice  with  which  women  are  not 
charged  by  men  ? Speak  the  truth.  Those  that  reject 
women  do  so  out  of  a stupid  firmness  of  mind.  According 
to  Manu,  women  possess  more  virtues  than  men. 

7.  Soma-deva  has  blessed  women  with  personal 
purity  (a) ; the  Gandhervas  have  given  them  pure  speech  ; 
Agni-deva  has  allowed  to  them  the  privilege  of  eating  any 
kind  of  food  without  restrictions.  Women  are  therefore 
without  faults. 

8.  The  Brahmins,  are  pure  in  their  feet  (6) , the  cows, 
in  their  buttocks  ; the  sheep  and  the  horse,  in  their  face, 
and  women  all  over  their  body, 

9.  Women  are  exceedingly  pure  and  are  without 
faults.  These,  (c)  if  any,  leave  them  with  their  menses. 

10.  Those  houses  will  meet  with  ruin  as  if  by  witch- 
craft, which  are  cursed  by  women  who  are  not  treated  with 
respect. 

(a)  arid  (6).  The  idea  is  one  somewhat  foreign  to  foreigners.  A 
pare  part  is  one  the  touch  of  which  does  not  pollute  a person  though  the 
part  may  suffer  pollution. 

(c).  The  Commentator  interprets  “ these”  to  mean  faults  of  the 
mind.  As  regards  faults  of  the  body,  expiatory  ceremonies  are  prescribed 
in  the  Shastras. 


CII.  27. j 


rRiiiAT  sA^nirA. 


131 


i K The  Sliastras  say  that  a woman  is  both  a man’s 
wife  and  mother  (a),  and  men  owe  their  birth  to  women. 
Those  that  speak  ill  of  women  therefore  are  ungrateful 
persons.  How  can  you  people  be  happy  ? 

12.  In  tlie  eye  of  the  Shastras^  adultery  in  man  or 
woman  is  equally  condemned.  Man  neglects  this  con- 
demnatioDj  while  women  respect  it.  Hence  the  superiority 
women  over  men. 

13.  According  ^to  the  Shastras  a man  that  commits 
adultery  shall  dress  himself  in  the  skin  of  the  ass  with  the 
hairy  side  without^  and  beg  his  meals  for  six  months  for  his 
purification. 

l-i.  Though  otie  might  indulge  in  sexual  pleasures 
for  100  yearS;  the  appetite  for  the  same  is  not  satiated. 
Whenever  men  refrnin  from  sexual  pleasures  after  the  death 
of  their  wives,  they  do  so,  because  of  their  inability;  while 
women  after  the  death  of  their  husbands  boldly  preserve 
their  chastity,  continuing  in  a state  of  widowhood. 

15.  A man  who  blames  a faultless  woman  is  not 
unlike  a thief  who,  suspecting  an  innocent  person  to  be  a 
thief,  sets  up  a hue  and  cry. 

16.  A man  when  alone  with  his  wife  speaks  to  her 
sweet  language  and  no  more  thinks  of  her  after  her  death  ; 
while  a woman  often  enters  the  funeral  pile  along  with  her 
diceascd  husband  out  of  her  love  for  him. 

17.  A person  who  is  foi'tunate  enough  to  have  an 
excellent  wife,  though  he  might  be  poor,  appears  to  me  as 
happy  as  a king.  The  main  pleasures  of  a king  are  women 
and  good  meals.  These  serve  as  sticks  to  increase  the  fire 
of  his  desires. 

(a).  The  idea  is  that  a person  is  born  over  again  in  the  shape  of  his. 


own  son. 


132 


BBIHAT  SAM  HIT  A. 


[CJT.  28. 


18.  Tiiafc  a pleasui-e  like  that  of  einbtaciiig  a woman 
who  has  just,  attained  womanhood,  whose  speech  is  short. 
Soft,  sweet  and  broken,  whose  bosoms  are  high  and  large, 
and  v\'ho  herself  is  full  of  sexual  passion,  is  not  to  be  found 
in  the  house  of  Brahma,  the  Creator  is  my  opinion. 

19.  In  the  Brahma  loka,  the  Munis,  the  Siddhas,  the 
Cel  estial  mucisians  may  pay  due  honors  to  persons  deserv- 
ing them.  What  pleasures  can  there  be  in  receiving  such 
honors?  These  personscannot  be  as  happy  as  those  who 
enjoy  excellent  women. 

20.  Prom  Bralima  down  to  worms,  we  find  pairs 
indulging  in  sexual  love-  What  is  there  to  be  ashamed  of 
in  the  matter — ^^oue  for  which  the  Supreme  Siva  assumed 
four  faces  (a). 


II. 

CHAPTEB  XXVJIL  (75). 

On  Amiability. 

1-  A man  of  agreeable  manners  enjoys  sexual  plea- 
sures fully  and  not  so  one  of  a morose  nature;  for  he  can- 
not secure  the  love  of  women.  A woman,  though  at  a dis- 
tance,  conceives  a child  of  the  shape  of  the  person  she  loves 
ardently  and  thinks  of  at  the  time. 

2.  Just  iu  the  same  way  as  a tree  that  grows  is  not 
difierent  from  the  parent  tree,  whether  we  plant  a branch 
or  sow  a seed,  so  the  main  features  of  the  child  partake  of 
the  features  of  its  father,  though  there  might  be  slight 
changes  due  to  the  soil. 

(a)-.  The  allusion  is  to  a visit  paid  to  Siva  by  Tilottama,  a danciug 
\vomau>  attached  to  the  Court  of  Indra.  As  she  went  round  Siva  by  way 
of  worship,  he  was  so  much  attracted  by  her  beauty  that  he  kept  looking 
at  her  with  four  faces  which  he  assumed,  while  his  one  face  was  directed  to« 
wards  his  consort  Parvati  whom  he  did  not  wish  to  offend. 


cri,  28  ] 


BRITIAT  SAMIUTA- 


The  subtle  soul  co-operates  with  the  Dianas  (the 
ruindj  ; the  niind_,  co-oporates  wdtli  the  senses;  the  senses, 
perceive  objects  ; all  this  takes  place  in  little  or  no  time- 
The  above  is  the  comioctiou  between  the  soul  and  the 
objects  around  us.  What  is  there  which  the  mind  cann<jt 
comprehend.?  Therefore,  wherever  the  mind  enters,  the 
soul  follows  it. 

4.  The  soul  being  subtle  whenever  it  enters  another 

soul,  it  requires  some  time  and  an  effort  of  the  mind  to 
know  the  latter-  The  soul,  which  iutenselv  meditates  on 
an  object^  assumes  the  shape  of  that  object,  and  therefore 
young  women’s  thoughts  are  always  directed  towards  amia- 
ble persons.  t 

5.  Keal  love  makes  one  beloved  of  others,  and  hatred 
makes  a person  unpopular.  There  is  great  sin  attaching 
to  attempts  at  winning  the  favor  of  a person  by  the  practice 
of  magic  or  the  use  of  drugs  or  by  stratagems,  and  no  plea- 
sure can  come  out  of  it. 

6-  A person  who  is  not  selfish  becomes  popular  and 
selfishness  makes  a man  unpopular.  A selfish  person 
executes  his  work  with  much  difficulty,  and  an  unselfish 
man  through  his  sweet  manners  and  speech  finds  it  easy  to 
do  his  work,  being  helped  by  others. 

7.  It  is  not  manly  in  a person  thoughtlessly  to 
attempt  to  do  a thing  or  to  utter  falsehood  with  a view  to 
please  others.  A person  who,  even  while  successfully 
executing  a business,  does  not  feel  proud  nor  indulge  in 
selfish  praise  is  truly  noble. 

8.  A person  who  desires  to  become  a general  favorite 
shall  speak  of  the  merits  of  other  men  in  terms  of  praise^ 
and  a person  who  speaks  of  the  demerits  of  other  men 
becomes  wicked  himself. 


134 


BBIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  29-. 


9.  All  men  wish  to  help  a person  who  aims  at  the 
good  of  the  people.  Tlie  renown  which  a person  will  derive 
from  an  act  of  assistance  to  his  enemy  when  in  difficulties 
is  a fortune  resulting  from  numerous  good  deeds. 

10.  Where  thei-e  are  real  merits^  the  attempt  to  sup- 
press them  only  increases  their  splendour  just  like  an 
attempt  to  suppress  flaming  fire  by  means  of  dry  grass.  A 
person  who  out  of  envy  aims  at  ruining  the  reputation  of 
other  men  is  hated  by  all. 


III. 

CHAPTER  XXIX,  (76j. 

On  SPER3tATIC  Dbugs  and  AIedicines. 

1 . If  the  blood  should  exceed,  the  issue  will  be  a female 
child;  if  the  semen  virile  should  exceed,  the  issue  will  be  a 
male  child  ; if  both  be  equal,  the  issue  will  be  a hermaphro- 
dite. It  is  therefore  necessary  to  take  medicines  for  tho 
increase  of  the  semen  virile. 

2.  The  tops  of  storied  houses,  moon-light,  sweet  liquor,, 
beautiful  women  with  the  ])assion  of  love,  the  music  of  the 
lute,  love  speech,  solihide,  and  flower  wreaths,  are  things 
whose  union  provokes  sexual  passion. 

3.  Prepare  a mixture  of  Mahsiha,  Dhatu,  {a)  honey, 
parada,  (quick-silver),  iron-dust,  Patthya^  bitumen,  vulanga 
and  ghee.  Take  this  for  21  days.  Though  80  years  old 
and  weak  with  age,  you  will  indulge  in  sexual  union  with 
the  enei'gy  of  a young  man. 


(a).  Vide  glossary  at  the  end  of  Chapter  77  for  an  explanation  c£  the 
various  medical  and  botanical  terms  occurring  in  this  and,  in  the  nesjt 
©hapteiv 


cir.  20.] 


I^RIITAT  SAMUITA> 


135 


Note. — With  the  exception  of  iioney  and  ghee,  tlie  other 
drugs  shall  be  powdered  and  mixed  in  equal  parts  and 
formed  into  a paste  with  honey  and  milk. 

4.  Put  into  the  milk  of  the  cow,  the  root  of  the  luqn' 
hacchu  and  heat  the  milk  and  then  drink  it;  or  roast  a 
quantity  of  broken  black-gram  in  the  ghee  obtained  by 
churning  pure  uncurdied  milk.  Eat  6 handfuls  of  the  seed 
and  then  drink  milk.  . You  will  engnge  in  sexual  union 
with  great  energy. 

5.  Soak  in  the  juice  of  the  pumpkin  its  powderd  root 
and  dry  it ; repeat  the  operation  7 times.  Put  the  powder 
into  milk  heated  with. sugar,  and  drink  it.  You  will  require 
many  women- 

6.  Soak  in  the  juice  of  the  fruit  of  the  Emblic  klyro- 
bolam  its  dried  knit  powdered  and  dry  it.  Repeat  the 
operation  7 times;  mix  it  with  honey,  sugar  and  ghee,  and 
lick  it  and  drink  milk.  You  will  require  many  women. 

7.  Put  into  the  milk  of  the  cow  the  testicle  of  the  goat, 
heat  the  milk,  soak  in  it  a considerable  quantity  of  sesamum 
seeds,  and  dry  it;  repeat  the  operation  7 times  ; eat  the 
seeds.  You  will  outbeat  the  sparrow  in  sexual  union. 

8.  Mix  with  the  cooked  Shastyka  rice  the  cooked 
broken  seeds  of  black  gram  ; eat  the  I’ice  and  then  drink 
milk;  you  will  go  to  bed  with  much  sexual  passion. 

9.  ]\lix  together  equal  quantities  of  the  powder  or 
the  flour  of  sesamum  seeds,  of  the  root  of  the  Asvagandha, 
of  Kapikacchu,  the  pumpkin  and  of  the  Shashitka  rice. 
Form  the  mixture  into  a paste  by  adding  the  milk  of  the 

goat  and  make  cakes  of  it,  roast  them  in  heated  ghee  and 
eat  the  cakes; 


loo 


BKITIAT  SAMIUTA" 


[cs.  2'.): 


] 0.  Or,  put  into  ilie  milk  of  the  cow  the  root  of  either 
of  Gokshura  or  the  pumpkin;  heat  tlie  milk,  and  drink  it; 
though  old  you  will  indulge  in  sexual  union  with  the 
enei'gy  of  a young  man.  We  will  now  prescribe  remedies 
for  dyspepsia. 

1 1.  Mix  together  equal  quantities  of  the  powder  of 
sison,  rock-salt,  Haritaki,  ginger,  and  long  pepper,  and 
put  the  mixture  either  in  liquor  or  in  butter-milk  or  water, 
slightly  heated  and  drink  it.  You  will  begin  to  have  a 
keen  appetite  for  food. 

12.  If  while  taking  the  cordials  described  above  you 
eat  with  your  rice  much  of  vegetable  preparations  which 
are  exceedingly  sour,  bitter^  saltish  or  pungent  you  will, 
though  young,  lose  your  sexu^d  energy  and  like  an  old  per^ 
son  state  false  excuses  before  women. 


Notes  : — The  following  is  extracted  from  a medical  work 
named  Katnakosa. 

1.  Soak  in  the  water  of  the  cocoanut  the  broken  seeds 
of  black-gram  and  diy  the  seeds,  repeat  the  operation  7 times; 
make  the  seeds  into  a paste  by  grinding,  make  cakes  of  it 
and  roast  them  in  heated  ghee  and  eat  the  cakes  and  then 
drink  milk;  you  will  require  a hundred  women. 

The  following  are  taken  from  a wmrk  named  Prayoga 
Sara  : — 

2.  Mix  together  in  an  iron  vessel  filled  with  ghee 
equal  quantities  of  grapes,  Makshikadhatu,  Sihijit,  quick- 
silver, the  excrement  of  the  turtle  dove,  Yidanga  and 
Haritaki  powxlered  ; take  a dose  of  the  mixture  every 
morning  ; you  will  become  strong  and  healthy  and  will  be 
freed  from  poison  and  from  jaundice,  and  will  have  an 
increase  of  semen  virile- 


BRIHAT  SAMIIItA. 


13? 


cn.  29-] 


3.  Mix  together  the  powder  of  Triphala  with  either 
jaggery  or  sugar,  eat  the  iiiixtare  and  di  ink  milk  heated 
with  the  root  of  Kapikacchu  mixed  with  it  j you  will  have 
an  increase  of  semen  vii’ile, 

4.  Mix  together  the  milk  of  the  cow  with  the  juice  of 
the  bark  of  the  silk-cotton  tree3  heat  the  mixture  till  it  is 
reduced  and  to  one-half  of  its  bulk.  Mix  with  it  one-third 
part  of  honey.  A woman  who  takes  a karsha  (one-fourth  pahi) 
of  this  milk  will  have  an  increase  of  blood. 

5.  There  will  also  be  an  increase  of  blood  if  a woman 
will  take  dried  grapes  ground  Avith  honey  on  a stone  and 
then  mixed  with  either  milk  or  gruel- 

G.  There  Avill  also  be  an  increase  of  blood  if  the  juice 
of  the  bark  of  the  rnango  be  drawn  into  the  nose. 


The  following  are  from  Susruta*. — ■ 

7.  Form  into  a paste  either  a mixture  of  the  powder 
of  sesamum  seeds,  black-gram,  and  the  root  of  the  pumpkin, 
or  the  flour  of  the  Sali  rice,  by  grinding  it  on  a stone  with 
the  juice  of  the  sugarcane  and  mix  Avith  it  rock  salt  and 
the  serum  of  flesh  of  the  hog  ; form  cakes  of  it  ; roast  them 
in  heated  ghee,  and  eat  the  cakes ; you  Avill  require  a 
hundred  women. 

8.  Put  into  milk  the  testicle  of  the  goat ; heat  the 
milk;  drench  in  it  sesamum  seeds  7 times,  drying  them  each 
time;  mix  with  them  the  serum  of  flesh  of  the  gaugetic 
porpoise;  make  cakes  of  the  mixture  and  roast  them  in  ghee 
and  eat  the  cakes;  you  will  require  a hundred  women. 

9.  Mix  together  long  pepper,  rock  salt,  and  the  testicle 
of  the  goat;  form  the  mixture  into  cakes  arid  roast  them  in 
ghee  obtained  from  uncurdled  milk;  cat  the  cakes.  You 
Avill  require  a hundred  Avomen- 

PS 


1S8 


BRinAT  SAMHITA-. 


[en.  29. 


10.  Form  a mixture  of  tlie  powder  of  equal  quantities 
of  either  long  pepper^,  black-gram  and  Sali  rice^  or  of  barley 
and  wheat;  form  the  mixture  into  cakes,  roast  them  in  ghee; 
eat  the  cakes  and  then  drink  milk  mixed  with  sugar  and 
heated.  You  will  require  ten  women. 

11.  Drench  in  the  juice  of  the  pumpkin  its  powdered 
root  7 times,  drying  the  powder  each  time  ; add  to  it  ghee, 
and  honey  and  eat  it  ; you  will  require  10  women. 

12.  Drench  7 times  in  the  juice  of  the  fruit  of  emblic 
rayrobolan  the  pow'der  of  its  dried  fruit,  drying  the  powdei* 
each  time  ; mix  with  it  ghee,  honey,  and  sugar  and  eat  it 
and  then  drink  milk.-  Though  you  may  be  80  years  old 
you  will  begin  to  possess  the  energy  of  a young  man. 

13.  Mix  together  long  pepper,  rock  salt,  and  the  testi- 
cle of  the  goat ; put  the  mixture  in  ghee,  heat  it  and  eat  it. 
You  will  have  an  increase  of  semen  virile-  The  testicles  of 
the  Gangetic  porpoise,  the  crab,  the  tuitle,  or  the  crocodile 
may  qe  similarly  mixed  with  the  other  ingredients.  The 
effect  will  be  the  same. 

14.  Drink  the  semen  virile  of  the  buffalo,  the  ox,  or 
tlie  sheep  ; 

15-  Or  pot  into  milk  the  fruit,  root,  bark  and  the 
calyx  of  the  young  buds  of  Aswattha  (the  holy  fig  tree); 
lieat  the  milk,  add  to  it  honeys  and  sugar ; drink  tho  milk. 
You  will  outbeat  the  sparrow. 

1 G.  Mix  well  wdth  honey  and  ghee  a pala  of  the 
flour  of  black-gram  and  eat  the  mixture. 

17.  Put  into  milk  the  root  of  the  Kapikacchu  and  the 
flour  of  wheat ; heat  the  milk  ; as  soon  as  it  cools  add  to  it 
• glieo,  and  drink  itj  and  then  drink  ordinary  milk. 


cii.  30-1  rsEiiiAT  sAiiiirrA.  133 

18.  Pub  into  glitie  the  testicle  of  the  ci’ocoJile  or  the 
rat  or  the  frog  or  the  sparrow  ; heat  the  giiee  and  rub  it  on 
the  soles  of  the  feet.  You  will  enjoy  as  many  women  as 
you  ])lease  as  long  as  you  do  nob  sot  yoiir  foot  on  tho 
ground. 

19.  Mix  with  sugar  the  powder  of  tho  seeds  of  tho 
Kaplkacchu  and  Ikshu’’aka.  Put  the  mixture  into  milk  ; 
heat  it  and  drink  it  while  it  is  hot. 

20.  Put  into  milk  the  powder  of  Ucchata,  heat  the 
milk  and  drink  it. 

21.  Put  into  mJlk  the  roots  of  Ucchata  and  Satavari  : 
heat  the  milk  and  drink  it. 

22.  Pub  into  milk  the  seeds  of  Kapikacchu  and  the 
broken  seeds  of^blackgram ; heat  the  milk  and  drink  it. 

23.  Put  into  milk  the  seeds  of  Kapikacchu,  Gokshu- 
raka  and  Ucchata;  heat  the  milk;  add  to  it  sugar  and 
drink  it. 

24.  Put  into  milk  black  gram,  the  root  of  the 
pumpkin  ’and  of  Ucchata ; heat  the  nailk,  add  to  it  ghee 
and  honey  and  put  sugar  in  it  and  drink  it. 

25.  Drink  the  milk  of  a sow  having  a grown  up  pig 
or  the  milk  of  a cow  subsisting  on  tlie  leaves  of  the  black- 
gram  plant.  In  all  these  cases  there  will  be  an  increase  of 
semen  virile. 


lY. 

CHAPTER  XXX.  (77).  ‘ 

Ox  Pj5RFUA[E  MixTOEES. 

] . To  a person  whose  hairs  are  white,  flower  wreaths, 
sandal  paste,  perfumed  smoke,  clothes  and  jewels  can  give 


140 


BRIIIAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH-  30. 


no  beauty.  It  is  therefore  necessary  to  blacken  and 
embellish  the  hair.  The  same  attention  shall  be  paid  to  it 
as  to  colly rium  and  jewels. 

2.  Pot  into  oai  iron  vessel  vineg-ar  or’  the  like  sour 
liquor  ; put  in  it  a quantity  of  the  Kodrava  (a)  grain  after 
removing  the  husk  and  iron  dust;  heat  the,  mixture  ; grind 
it  well  on  a stone;  rub  it  over  the  hairs  of  the  head  freed 
from  oil ; tie  over  the  hairs  the  moist  leaves  of  the  Aragva- 
oha  and  the  like  trees  ; remain  so  for  six  hours. 

3.  Then  remove  the  mixture  from  the  hairs,  and  rub 
over  them  the  paste  of  the  fruit  of  the  Amalaka  (Emblic 
myrobolam);  cover  them  with  moist  leaves  as  before  and 
remain  so  for  another  six  hours  ; bathe  as  prescribed  below  j 
the  hairs  will  become  black. 

-N.  B. — The  Commentator  advises  the  application  of 
the  mixture  to  shaven  heads. 

4.  Then  bathe  in  waters  prepared  for  the  purpose  ; 
rub  over  the  hairs  fragrant  oil,  thus  removing  the  disagree- 
able scent  of  the  mixture  ; the  pleasures  of  royalty  may 
then  be  enjojmd  by  a king  by  means  of  various  kinds  of 
perfumes. 

5.  Mix  together  equal  quantities  of  cinnamon, 
Kushtha,  Eenu,  Nalika,  Sprikka,  Myrrh,  Valaka,  Tagara, 
Kesara  and  Patra  and  grind  them  on  a stone  forming  them 
into  a paste  ; rub  it  over  the  head  and  then  bathe;  such  a 
bath  is  suited  to  kings. 

6.  Mix  together  in  oil  the  powder  of  Manjishtha, 
Vyaghranakha,  Sukti,  cinnamon,  Kushtha  and  myrrh  > 
heat  the  mixture  in  the  sun.  It  is  known  as  Champaka- 
gandhi  oil. 

(a).  For  an  explanation  of  the  various  botanical  terms  occurring  in 
■fihis  Chapter  the  reader  is  referred  to  the  Glossary  at  the  end. 


err.  30.] 


briiiat  samhita. 


141 


7.  Grind  togetlror  equal  quantities  cf  Patra^  Turuslika, 
Vala  and  Tag’nra  and  you  will  get  a peiTuine  provoking 
sexual  passion.  Add  to  this  perfume  Prianguka  and 
expose  the  mixture  to  the  smoko  of  Katukarohini  and 
llingulika.  You  will  get  a perfume  wliicli  is  known  as 
Vakulagandka.  To  this  add  Kuslitlia  and  you  w ill  get  a 
})Ci£umo  knoAvn  as  Ut|'»alagandlia.  Add  to  this  sandal, 
you  will  get  again  the  perfume  known  as  Cliampakagandha. 
Add  to  this  nutmeg/  cinnamon  and  Kustumbari  ; you 
will  get  a perfume  known  as  Atimuktagandha. 

8.  Mix  together  one-fourth  parts  of  Satapushpa  and 
Kiindurukoj  half  p^rts  of  Nakha  and  Thurushka,  and  one 
part  of  Sandal  and^  Priangu  ; grind  them  well  and  expose 
the  mixture  to  the  smoke  of  Gnda  and  Islakha-  You  will 
then  get  an  excellent  perfume. 

9.  Grind  together  equal  quantites  of  Jatamamsi, 
Yaliika,  Thurushka^  Nakha  and  Sandal  and  form  a paste  j 
expose  it  to  the  smoko  of  Bdellium,  Yaluka^  lac/  Alusta, 
Nakha  and  Sarkara, 

10.  One  part  of  Haritaki,  2 parts  of  Sankha,  3 parts 
of  Kshudramusta,  4 parts  of  Drava,  5 parts  of  Ambu,  G’parts 
of  Guda,  7 parts  of  Utpala,  8 parts  of  Sylaka  and  9 parts 
of  Musta  give  you  a perfume.  Numerous  kinds  of  perfumes 
may  be  similarly  prepared  by  mixing  together  different 
parts  of  each  substance. 

Notes* 

The  text  gives  an  instance  of  the  proportion  in  which 
the  ingredients  are  to  be  mixed.  Similarly,  of  the  9 sub- 
stances we  can  take  from  1 to  9 parts  of  each,  and  no  mixture 
ought  to  contain  the  same  number  of  parts  of  any  two  sub- 
stances. The  question  is  to  find  the  number  of  different 
varieties  of  mixtures.  Suppose  the  nine  substances  to  be 


142 


BPJLIAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  30. 


represented  by  tbe  nine  letters  from  A to  the  propor- 
tion of  tbe  |)aits  being  from  1 to  9.  As  each  substance 
inay^  be  taken  from  1 to  9 parts  and  as  no  two  sub- 
stances shall  be  taken  the  same  number  of  parts  the 
number  of  mixtures  required  is  the  number  of  ways  in  which 
the  figures  from  1 to  9 may  be  written  under  the  letters 
from  A to  I>  This  is  the  number  of  permutations  of  9 
things  taken  altogether^  wLioh  is  equal  to  1 X2x3x 4x5x6 
X 7x  8X 9^.362880.  The  Stanza  gives  us  therefore  3C2880 
diffei  ent  varieties  of  perfumes. 

11.  Mix  together  4 parts  each  of  Sita_,  Syla_,  and  Murta 
2 parts  each  of  Sree  and  Sarja,  and  one  part  each  of  Nakha 
and  Bdellium_,  grind  them  all  on  a stone  with  honey  ; add 
to  the  mixture,  Camphor.  You  will  then  get  a perfume 
known  asKopachada  (destroyer  of  anger)  fit  only  for  kings. 

12.  Mix  together  Cinnamon,  TJsira,  and  Patra  one 
part  each,  and  Sukshmaila  half  a part;  powder  them  well ; 
add  to  the  mixture  equal  parts  of  Musk  and  Camphor.  You 
will  get  an  excellent  perfume. 

13  & 14.  Of  the  16  substances  Ghana,  Valaka,  Syle- 
yaka,  Karpura,  Usira,  Nagapushpa,  Vyaghrauakha,  Sprikka 
Agaru,  Damanaka,  Nakha,  Tagara^  Dhannya,  Takkola, 
Chora  and  Sandal,  any  four  mixed  in  the  proportion  of 
1 , 2,  3,  and  4 parts  will  form  a perfume.  As  the^number 
of  four  substances  out  of  16  is  large  and  as  each  of 
the  four  substances  may  be  mixed  from  1 to  4 parts  the 
number  of  mixtures  will  be  very  large.  The  process  is 
known  as  Gandharnava — ocean  of  perfumes. 

15.  Dhann3^a  and  Karpura  being  substances  of  strong 
scent,  a part  of  the  former  and  a little  less  than  a part  of  the 
latter  shall  be  added — these  two  substances  shall  never 
be  mixed  in  2,  3,  or  4 parts. 


cn-  30. 


BIIIHAT  BAMHItA. 


]43 


1 G.  The  mixiures  shall  be  exposed  ficst  to  the  smoko 
of  Sreevatsa_,  secondly,  to  that  of  Sarjara^  tliirdly^  to  that  of 
Giida,  and  lastly  to  that  of  iSfaklui.  Add  to  the  mixttiro 
both  Camphor  and  musk- 

17.  The  process  gives  us  174720  («)  different  varieties 
of  porfames. 

18.  One  part  of  a substance  can  be  mixed  with  2,  3 
or  4 parts  of  three  other  substances  in  G ways.  Similarly 
2,  3 or  4 parts  of  the  same  substance  can  be  mixed  respec- 
tively with  1,  3,  4, — 1,  2,  4, — 1,  2,  3 parts  of  the  3 other 
substances  each  in  C ways- 

•V 

19.  Thus  beginning  with  a single  substance  we  get 
24  varieties  of  perfumes;  beginning  with  each  of  the  8 
other  substances  we  shall  get  72  varieties;  or  96 
varieties  in  all. 

20.  The  number  of  four  substance  out  of  the  IG  sub- 
stances is  1820. 

21.  Every  set  of  four  substances  gives  ns  9G 
varieties;  by  multiplying  1820  by  96  we  shall  obtain  the 
number  already  stated;,  viz,  174720. 

(a) . Wrong.  Yicle  notes  which  follow. 

(h) . W rang.  Vide  roles  which  follow. 

Kotps^ — The  above  number  lias  been  obtained  on  the 
supposition  that  tho  two  substances  I'hanya  and  Karpnra 
enter  into  the  mixtures  iu  2,  3 and  4 parts  also,  which 
liowever  is  not  tlio  case.  I'he  actual  number  wdll  therefore 
be  less  than  tlie  number  stated  above.  Wo  shall  first 
explain  how^  the  number  was  arrived  at  by  the  authoi', 
pointing  out  an  ejror  committed  by  him  wdricli  has  perma- 
nentl}^  ci-ept  into  tho  text  and  then  find  out  tho  actual 
number  of  mixtures  under  the  conditions  given. 


144 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[gh  30. 

In  the  Chapter  on  combinations  in  Algebra^  we  learn 
that  the  number  of  combinations  of  n things  taken  r at  a 
time 

n (n — 1)  (n — ^)(n — 3)  .....  (ii — r + l) 

“ - ^ ^ - . 


the  number  of  combinations  16  things  taken  4 at  a time 
16X15X14X  13 
= — = 1820 


1 x2x  3x4 


Again  take  one  of  these  sets  of  4 substances.  Call, 
the  substances  by  the  letters  A^  D ; each  of  these 

enters  into  tlie  mixture  in  1,  ^ nnd  4 parts;  but  no  two 

substances  enter  in  tlie  same  number  of  parts.  The  ques- 
tion now  is  to  find  out  the  number  of  mixtures  that  can  be 
formed  of  each  set  of  four  substances.  The  number  required 
is  the  number  of  ways  in  which  the  figures  C 2^  3 and  4 
may  be  written  under  the  letters  A,  Bj,  D.  This  is 
the  number  of  permutations  of  four  things  taken  all 
together,  which  is  equal  to  1 X 2 X 3 x 4=24.  The  author 
is  therefore  wrong  when  he  sa^^s  that  the  number  of  such 
mixtures  is  96. 

We  shall  show  his  error  by  actually  putting  down  the 
proportions  of  the  various  mixtures. 


A. 

B. 

c. 

D. 

A. 

B. 

C. 

D. 

1 

2 

3 

4 

2 

1 

o 

O 

4 

2 

4 

O 

}} 

1 

4 

3 

■>} 

n 

D 

4 

)) 

3 

1 

4 

3 

4 

2 

3 

4 

1 

5^ 

4 

2 

3 

}3 

4 

1 

o 

4 

3 

o 

A4 

V 

4 

3 

1 

Total 

C 

Total 

C 

ca.  SO.] 

BRIIIIT 

S Am  HIT  A.' 

A. 

B. 

C. 

D. 

A. 

B. 

C. 

I). 

3 

1 

2 

4 

4 

1 

2 

• > 

f> 

}> 

1 

4 

2 

}3 

1 

3 

9 

sU 

‘j 

2 

1 

4 

•33 

2 

o 

.3 

1 

2 

4 

1 

2 

1 

<> 

o 

4 

1 

O 

4^ 

>3 

3 

1 

9 

3) 

4 

0 

1 

3 

9 

1 

Total 

6 

Tota 

6 

In  all  24  varieties  for  eacli  set. 

Now  the  author  says  that  we  shall  get  another  24 
varieties  beginning  wjth  the  several  parts  of  B and  24  begin- 
ning with  the  several  parts  of  C and  24  beginning  with  the 
several  parts  of  D_,  thus  93  varieties  in  all.  It  is  clear  that 
Yaraha  Mihira  must  have  ‘dozed  a little’  when  he  wrote 
stanza  19  ; for  the  number  of  varieties  in  reality  is  only  24 
and  not  96.  For  the  24  varieties  we  have  given  above  include 
and  are  identical  with  the  72  more  varieties  of  the  author. 
We  will  begin  for  instance  with  the  several  parts  of  B. 
These  are 


B. 

A. 

c. 

D. 

B. 

A. 

C. 

D. 

1 

2 

3 

4 

0 

1 

f ) 

O 

4 

33 

9 

4 

3 

33 

1- 

4 

3 

33 

3 

9 

4 

33 

3 

1 

4 

33 

3 

4 

2 

33 

3 

4 

1 

33 

4 

9 

3 

33 

4 

1 

» » 

O 

33 

4 

3 

2 

33 

4 

3 

1 

Total 

6 

Total 

6 

B. 

A. 

C. 

D, 

B. 

A. 

c. 

D. 

3 

1 

2 

4 1 

4 

1 

o 

» f 

o 

33 

1 

4 

2 

33 

1 

8 

9 

33 

9 

1 

4 i 

33 

2 

1 

33 

• > 

4 

1 

33 

2 

o 

1 

33 

4 

1 

2 

33 

o 

1 

2 

33 

4 

9 

4iJ 

1 

33 

3 

2 

1 

Total' 

6 

Total 

6 

19 


146 


EPJHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  SO. 


In  all  24  varieties  beginning  with  the  several  parts  o£ 
B.  Now  comparing  these  with  the  24  varieties  already 
given,  it  will  be  found  that  the  two  lists  are  identically  the 
same.  So  that  4 substances  mixed  in  the  proportion  of  1,  2 
3,  4 parts  each,  give  us  only  24  mixtures,  and  not  96. 
Therefore,  the  total  number  of  mixtures  is  24  X 1820= 
4S680  and  not  90 X 1820  or  174720  as  stated  by  the  author. 
It  is  strange  that  Utpala,  the  commentator,  has  not  noticed 
the  error. 

As  two  of  the  16  substances  do  not  enter  into  the 
mixtures  in  2,  3 and  4 parts,  we  will  find  the  actual  num- 
ber of  varieties  under  the  conditions  given a point 

which  the  author  has  omitted.  Keeping  aside  the  two  sub- 
stances, the  number  of  sets  of  four  substances  out  of  14  is 
the  number  of  combinations  of  14  things  taken  4 at  a 
time. 

1 . 14  X 13  X 12  X 11  Tooii  A.  f 

This  IS  equal  to  ; — ■ = 1001  . As  before 

^ lx  2X3X4 

each  set  wdll  give  us  24  mixtures.  The  total  number  on 
mixtures  therefore  is  lOOl  X 24  = 24024 (I). 

Again  the  number  of  3 substances  out  of  14 
14  X 13  X 12 

— — — ==364.  We  will  now  find  out  the  number  of 

1x2x3 

varieties  of  mixtures,  which  each  set  of  3 substances  will 
give  us,  taking  them  in  2,  3 and  4 parts.  Let  the  letters 
A,  B,  C,  denote  the  3 substances  and  the  figures  2,  3,  4 
denote  the  parts.  The  number  required  is  the  number  of 
ways  in  which  the  figures  2,  •-,  4 can  be  written  under  the 
letters  A,B,C,  This  is  the  number  of  permutations  of  8 things 
taken  all  together  — 1 X 2X3  = 6.  I'herefore  the  total 
number  of  mixtures  of  3 substances  out  of  14  = 364  X 6 = 

2 1S4.  Adding  to  each  of  these  mixtures  one  part  of  Dhanya 
WQ  get  2184  mixtures  of  4 substances. — (II). 


CH.  SO.] 


BKIHAT  SAMHITA. 


147 


Adding  to  tlie  same  a little  less  tliern  a part  of  Karpura 
we  get  2184  mixtures  of  4 substances —(III). 

Now  as  nnder  the  cojiditions  of  the  case  no  two  sub- 
stances shall  enter  into  a mixture  in  the  same  number  of 
paitS;,  and  as  the  two  substances  Dhanva  and  Kurpura  are 
only  to  be  added  in  one  part  each;  it  is  evident  that  these 

two  do  not  enter  into  a mixture  together otherwise 

we  shall  have  to  find  out  the  number  of  sets  of  2 substances 
out  of  14  and  the  number  of  mixtures  of  each  set^  each  sub- 
stance being  taken  ‘from  2 to  4 parts  and  to  each  mixture 
thus  obtained  add  a mixture  of  one  part  of  Dhanya  and  a 
little  less  than  a pa^’t  of  Kirpura.  Such  however  does  not 
appear  to  be  the  object  of  the  author.  He  evidently  wants 
that  each  mixture  shall  contain  10  parts. 

The  total  number  of  mixtures  under  the  conditions 
given  is  24024  + 2184-f 21 84=28392. 

22.  Beginning  from  unity  form  several  series  of 
numbers  by  adding  together  each  figure  with  the  next  and 
the  sum  with  the  next  and  so  on  omitting  only  the  last. 
The  last  of  the  series  will  represent  the  number  of  combi- 
nations required. 

Notes: — In  this  stanza,  the  author  lays  down  a rule 
for  finding  the  number  of  combinations  of  n things  taken  v 
together  when  n and  r are  known.  For  instance,  required 
the  number  of  combinations  of  7 things  taken  4 together. 
Write  in  a line  the  figures  from  1 to  7 and  call  it  the  first 
series  : thus  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7 ...  ...  ...  •••  (i)* 

Form  the  second  series  from  the  1st  as  follows : 
1+2=  8 ; 3 + 3 =6;  6 + 4=10;  10  + 5=:=15;  15  + 6=21.  So 
that  the  2nd  series  is  1,  8,  G,  10,  15,  2l.  ...  ...  (2). 

Form  the  3rd  series  from  the  2nd  as  follows  : 1+3=4  ; 
4+6=10  ; 10  + 10=20 ; 20  + 15=35.  So  that  the  3rd 

series  is,  1,  4^  10,  20,  35  ...  (3) 


143 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  30. 


Form  the  4th  series  form  the  3rd  thus  : 1 + 4=5; 
5 + 10=15  ; 15+20=35  ; so  that  the  4th  series,  is  1,  5, 15,35... 
(4)  and  so  on.  The  number  of  combinatious,  therefore^  of  7 
tblugs  taken  4 together  is  the  last  number  of  the  4thserieSj 
viz.,  35. 

The  above  may  appear  to  be  a somewhat  clumsy  pro- 
cess. Bhaskarachariar  in  his  Lilavati  (Arithmetic)  gives  the 
iodentical  rule  now  found  in  Western  works  on  Algebra. 
He  says  : Form  fractions  with  tbe  figures,  say,  from  7 to  1 
for  numerators^  and  from  1 to  7 for  denominators  thus  : 

7 R 4 <5  2 1 

T’  2’  "S’  4^  57  T* 

The  number  of  combinations  of  7 things  taken  2 
together  is  the  product  of  tbe  first  two  fractions=21.  The 
number  taken  3 together  is  the  product  of  the  first  three 
fractions=35.  The  number  taken  4 together  is  the  pro- 
duct of  tbe  first  4 fractions=35  and  so  on-  This  process 
is  also  mentioned  in  the  Aphoiisms  of  Pingala  known  as 
Chandas  Sutra,  a very  ancient  work. 

23.  Agaru,  Pattra,  Turushka  and  Syleya  shall  be 
mixed  in  two,  three, five  and  eight  parts  and  Priyangu,Musta, 
Basa  and  Kesa  shall  be  mixed  in  five,  eight  two,  and  three 
parts. 

24.  Sprikka,  Cinnamon,  Tagara  and  Mamsi  shall 
be  mixed  in  four,  one,  seven  and  six  parts ; and  Sandal,  Na- 
kha,  Sreeka,  and  Kunduruka  shall  be  mixed  in  seven,  six, 
four,  and  one  parts. 

25.  Each  set  of  four  substances  may  be  mixed  in  all 
possible  ways  in  the  parts  mentioned — the  number  of  parts 
being  always  eighteen  in  the  case  of  each  mixture.  The 
mixtures  form  perfumes,  ointment,  and  the  like. 

Note. — As  before,  each  set  of  four  substances  will  give 
24  varieties  of  mixtures- 


BRIIIAT  SAMIIITA. 


140 


CH.  30.] 


2G.  To  the  mixtures  mentioned  above,  add  equal 
parts  of  Naklia,  Tagara,  Turushka,  Nutmeg,  Camphor  and 
musk  and  expose  them  to  the  smoke  of  Guda  and  Nakha. 
You  will  get  what  are  known  as  Sarvatohhadra  perfumes. 

27.  If,  to  the  same  mixtures,  jmu  add  equal  parts  of 
nutmeg,  musk  and  camphor,  and  drench  the  resulting  mix- 
tures in  Sahakara  and  honey  you  will  again  get  what  are 
known  as  Sarvatohhadra  perfumes. 

28.  Whenever'  the  substances  Sarjarasa  and  Sree- 
vasaka  are  mentioned  with  other  substances  for  giving  per- 
fumed smoke  remove  the  two  and  use  in  their  stead  valaka 
and  cinnamon.  The  resulting  mixture  will  serve  for  bath. 

29  & 30.  Mix  " together  any  three  out  of  the  nine 
substances,  Lodhra,  Usira,  Nata,  Agaru,  Musta,  Malaya, 
Priyangu,  Dhana  and  Pattya.  Add  to  the  mixture  one 
part  of  Sandal,  one  part  of  Turushka,  half  a part  of  Nakha 
and  a quarter  part  of  Satapushpa  ; expose  the  mixture  to 
the  smoke  of  Katuka,  Hingula  and  Guda ; we  thus  get  34 
diherent  varieties  of  mixtures. 


Notes  : The  number  of  combinations  of  nine  sub- 
stances taken  3 at  a time  is  equal  to  Jx-J=84 

31 . Allow  the  tooth-brush  (a)  to  soak  in  the  urine  of 
the  cow  mixed  with  the  powder  [of  Haritaki  for  7 days. 
Then  put  it  in  fragrant  water  prepared  as  described  below. 

32.  Fragrant  water  shall  be  prepared  with  cardamom, 
cinnamon,  pattra,  Anjana,  honey,  Maricha,  Nagapushpa 
and  Kushtta  and  allow  the  tooth-bru^h  to  remain  in  the 
water  till  it  becomes  fragrant. 

(a).  This  is  a piece  of  stick  or  small  twig  of  particular  trees  (vide 
Chap.  85)  used  as  tooth-brush. 


150 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  80. 


33.  Mix  together  the  powder  of  4 parts  of  Dutmeg, 
2 parts  of  patra,  and  one  part  of  cnrdamorQ  and  camphor ; 
smear  it  over  the  tooth-brush  and  dry  it  in  the  sun. 

34.  Tooth-brush  prepiired  as  stated  above  shall  be 
used  hy  the  Brahmins,  the  Kshatryas,  and  the  Yysias 
only.  By  its  use  the  appearance  of  a person  will  become 
bright,  his  countenance  will  become  agreeable,  his  mouth 
jjure  and  of  good  smell,  and  his  voice  sweet. 

35.  The  chewing  of  Tamboola  (a)  excites  sexual 
passion,  brightens  personal  appearance,  promotes  pros- 
perity, causes  the  mouth  to  smell  sweet,  increases  strength, 
removes  phlegmatic  affections  and  produces  many  other 
benefits. 

86.  A due  admixture  of  lime  reddens  the  lips.  If 
the  nut  exceed  its  measure  it  will  bring  down  the  color  j 
if  the  lime  exceed  its  measure,  the  month  will  smell 
ill  and  if  the  leaves  exceed  their  measure  the  mouth  will 
be  of  good  smell. 

37.  If  the  leaves  exceed  their  measure  at  night  or 
the  nut  exceed  its  measure  b}^  day  the  effect  will  be  good  ; 
if  the  case  be  otherwise,  the  Tamboola  will  not  be  found 
sweet.  If  the  Tamboola  contain  as  its  ingredients  Takola^ 
Arecanut,  Lavaliphala  and  Parijata,  it  will  exhilirate  the 
spirit  and  excite  sexual  passion. 


Glossary  of  Medical  and  Botanical  terms  occurring  in 
Chapters  76  & 77. 


A. 


Agaru,  Amyris  Agallocha. 

Ambu,  the  plant  Andropogoa  Schoenanthus.  (^(^Qesjir 
Anjana,  Antimony. 


(a).  This  consists  of  Arecanut  and  betel  mixed  with  lime. 


CH.  oO.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


151 


Arag-vadlia;  the  tree  Cathartocarpus  Fistula. 
Aswagandha,  the  plant  Physalia  Flexuosa. 

0. 

Chora,  a kind  of  perfume.  The  plant  Chiysopogon 
Aciculatus. 


D. 

Damanaka,  Artemisia  Indica. 

Dhana^  the  plant  Alhagi  Maurorum  ? 

Dhanjaka,  Coriander  seeds.  Qsrr^^LDm(sQ<sS^n- 
Drava,  Myrrh. 

Ghana,  the  bulbous  root  of  the  plant  Syperus  Hex- 
astychus  Communis. 

Goksburaka,  the  plant  Asteracantha  Longifolia.  0/^0- 

Guda,  a kind  of  bdelliuin.  (^!sjQ<o^lui1), 

H 

Harltaki,  the  fruit  of  the  Teimlnalia  Chebnla. 
Hiuguka,  the  prickly  night  Shade ; Solanum 
dacquini. 

I 


Ikshuraka,  Asteracantha  Longifolia.  SiT(^&re^. 

J 

datamacisi,  the  plant  Nardostachis  Jatamamsi. 

K 


Kapikacchu,  the  plant  Mucuna  Pi-uritus. 
Katuka,  a I’ragrant  grass,  Trichosanthes  Dioeca. 

C irnSlezff. 


Kesa,  the  plant  Andrapogon  Schoenanthus-  (^(^Qeu^. 
Kesara,  Mimusops  Elcngi. 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA.  [hC.  ^0, 

Kodrava,  a species  of  gram  eaten  by  tbo  poor.  Pas- 
palum  Scrobiculatam. 

Kunduruka,  tke  resin  of  tke  plant  Boswellia  Thurifera. 
Kushtha,  a medicinal  plant  Costus  Speciosus  or  Arabi”  . 
cus. 

Kustumburij  Coriander  seeds. 

L 

Lavalipliala,  the  fruit  of  the  Averrhoa  Icida. 

Lodhra,  the  tree,  Symplocos  P^acemosa,  the  bark  oi 
which  is  used  in  dyeing. 

M 

Makshika-dhatu,  a kind^of  pyrites_,  — a kind  of  honey 
like  mineral  substance. 

Malaya,  Sandal-wood. 

Manjishtha,  Bengal  madder. 

Mriga,  Musk. 

Mudra,  Cyperus  Botundus. 

Musta,  a species  of  grass.  Cyperus  Rotundus. 

N 

Nagapushpa,  Mesua  Roxburghi  . isnsuy, 

^Siakha,  a vegetable  perfume. 

!Nalika,  a fragrant  substance. 

Kata^  the  seed  of  the  Cassia  Tora. 

P 

* 

Parijata,  nutmeg? 

Pathya,  citron.  Terminalia  Chebiila.- 
Patra,  the  leaf  of  the  Cassia. 

Priyangu,  a medicinal  plant  and  perfume. 

R 

Renu,  a drug  or  medicinal  substance  fragrant  but 
bitter  and  si  ightly  pungent  i taste  and  of  a greyish 
color. 


BUIHAT  SAMHITA. 


153 


€1L  30.1 


S 

Sahal  varo,  a sort  of  fragrant  Mango  tree. 

Sailaka,  bitumen. 

Sarja^  tlie  resinous  exudation  of  the  Sal  tree. 

Sarkara,  grit. 

Satapushpa^  a sort  of  dill  or  fennel.  Anetliiim  Sowa 

Satavari,  Asparagus  Kacemosus.  ^ekiGs^ae£^>LLL.rre^T 
Sita,  grit. 

Sprikka,  the  plant  Trigonella  Corniculta.  rsnsui^, 

Sree,  Turpentine. 

Sukshmaila,  sniall  cardamoms. 

Sukti,  a sort  of  perfume  in  appearance  like  the  dried 
Shell  fish. 

■ ■ T 

Tagarn,  the  seed  of  Cassia  Tora 
Takkola^  the  tree  Pimenta  Acris 

Trlphala;,  the  three  myrobalans,  the  fruits  of  Termi- 
nalia  Chebula,  Terminalia  Bellerica,  Phyllanthus 
Ernblica.  s^ssfruUj  LDrrQsffoj. 

Turushka,  a species  of  Kunduruka  Oiibanum^  Indian 
incense  ; the  resin  of  Boswellia  Serrata.  ujri^Qs^mhu- 

jfrrss^. 

u 

XJcchataj  the  root  of  Cyperus  Juncifol. 

Usira,  the  fragrant  root  of  the  plant  Andropogon  Mu- 
rieatus,  GojiLi^Osufr. 

Utpala,  the  plant  Costus  Speciosus. 

Y 

Yala^  a fragrant  grass,  Andropogon  Shoemanthus.  @0- 
Qojir, 

Yaluka,  a species  of  Cucumber. 

Yidanga,  Erycibc  Paniculata.  euniLjd^ u.!asuj, 

20 


154  BRIHAT  SAMHITA.  [CH.  3l. 

Vyagbranukha,  a kind  of  medicinal  kerb  with  a fra- 
grant root.  L-iioQLLjQn^6cTjr><s/5  ^^ireSliu  th. 

V. 

CHAPTER  XXXL  (78). 

On  Sii’XUAL  Union. 

1.  King  Vidurattha  was  killed  by  bis  queen  who  con- 
cealed a weapon  in  her  plaited  bair;  and  the  king  of  Be- 
nares was  killed  by  his  queen,  who  disliked  him^  with  poison 
which  she  carried  in  ber  anklets. 

2.  Thus  wives  who  do  not  love  their  husbands  have 
killed  them.  Of  what  use  is  it  to  quote  more  instances.  Hus- 
bands shall  thei’efore  ascertain  in  various  ways  whether 
thev  have  secured  the  atfection  of  their  wives. 

8.  A loving  wife  shews  her  love  in  various  ways.  She 
will,  in  the  presence  of  her  lord,  shew,  as  if  by  accident, 
her  navel,  arms,  and  ornaments  and  will  adjust  her 
garments  ; will  allow  the  hairs  of  her  head  to  fall  loose  as 
if  by  accident,  will  raise  her  ejmbrows,  will  tremble,  and 
will  cast  a side-look  at  her  busband. 

4.  She  will  spit  aloud  ,*  laugh  openly;  get  first  into  the 
bed  ; crack  her  joints  ; yawn  ; beg  for  the  gift  of  trifles  ; em- 
brace a child  and  kiss  it;  will  fora  time  look  at  her  friend  -» 
look  at  her  husband  when  his  look  is  turned  from  her  ^ 
scratch  her  ears  ; and  will  speak  in  his  praise  in  his  absence 

A loving  wife  will,  besides,  speak  affectionately  to 
her  husband,  assist  him  with  ber  money,  will  give  np  her 
anger  at  the  sight  of  her  lord  and  will  be  filled  with  pleasur- 
able sensations  ; will  meet  any  calumnious  attacks  on  him 
by  recounting  his  virtues. 

0.  She  will  show  due  respect  to  the  friends  of  her 
lord  and  hate  his  enemies  ; she  will  feel  grateful  to  him 
f or  bis  helps  ; will  feel  distressed  during  his  absence. 


CH.  31.] 


BIIIHAI  SAMHITA 


7.  An  unloving  wife  will  contract  her  eye-brows  ; 
turn  her  look  away  from  her  lord;  will  be  wanting  in 
gratitude ; will  not  move  from  her  place  at  the  sight  of 
her  husband  ; will  never  feel  cheerful  ; her  lips  will  be 
dull  and  motionless  ; she  will  be-friend  the  enemies  of  her 
lord  and  will  be  harsh  in  her  speech. 

8.  She  will  shake  with  fear  at  the  sight  or  touch  of 
her  lord  ; will  feel  haughty ; will  not  attempt  to  pacify  her 
lord  when  he  leaves  her  company  in  anger  ; she  will  wipe 
olf  her  face  after  sexual  enjoyment ; will  go  to  bed  before 
her  lord  and  rise  after  him. 

9 & lO.  Begging  women,  female  devotees,  maid  ser- 
vants, the  nurse,  girls,  the  laundress,  the  flower-woman,  the 
harlot,  a fiiend,  the  barbar  woman,  these  generally  serve  as 
messengers  or  go-betweens  for  women  and  bring  disgrace 
and  ruin  on  respectable  families  ; it  is  therefore  necessary 
to  protect  family  women  from  the  intrigues  of  these  per- 
sons and  to  maintain  the  honor,  fame,  and  respectability  of 
the  family. 

11.  To  go  out  at  night,  to  keep  awake  on  the  pre 
teuco  of  a religious  observance,  to  excuse  herself  on  the 
false  plea  of  illness,  to  be  found  for  ever  in  the  houses  of 
other  persons,  to  attend  plays  and  the  like,  to  consult  as- 
trologers, to  frequent  mourning  houses  or  festivals  are  acts 
from  which  women  should  bo  kept  back. 

12.  A modest  wife  is  one  who  out  of  shame  does  not 
first  exhibit  an  icclination  to  sexual  embiace  ; who 
thi-oughout  is  nevertheless  subject  to  sexual  pa.ssion. 

13.  Tne  virtues  of  a woman  are  young  age,  beauty, 
decoratiou  with  ornaments,  being  agreeable  to  her  lord, 

being  learned  in  matters  which  will  make  married  life 
happy  and  being  of  a playful  nature.  A lady  possessing 
these  virtues  is  known  as  a female  gem.  A woman  not 


BKIHAT  SAHIHITA 


[CH.  31, 


possessing  these  virtues  is  loathed  by  a man  of  taste  as’’ 
a disease. 

Notes. — Vyasa  says  : A woman  who  is  chaste  and 
innocent^  who  eats  pure  meals,  who  is  of  sweet  speec  and 
who  is  fondly  attached  to  her  husband  is  hnown  as  a Laksh- 
ini  (goddess  of  wealth). 

Again,  a woman  who  has  ugly  eyes,  who  is  dirty^ 
quarrelsome,  talkative,  is  known  as  a Raksbasi  (Fury). 

14.  A woman  shall  not  indulge  in  low  language  ; nor 
shall  she  wear  bad  colored  clothes  ; nor  be  of  a dirty  body. 

15.  A good  wife  is  one  who  breathes  unlike  men  ; who 
extends  her  arms  to  her  lord  to  serve  as  a pillow  for  his 
head  ,*  the  hair  of  whose  head  is  of  good  smell,  who  is  fondly 
attached  to  her  husband  5 who  sleeps  after  him  and  rises 
before  him. 

16.  A woman  of  a wicked  nature  and  one  of  weak 
liealth  shall  be  I’ejected.  A woman  whose  Sonita  (blood) 
is  black,  green,  yellow,  or  of  copper  color  shall  also  be  re- 
jected. 

17.  A person  shall  not  join  in  sexual  union  a woman 
who  sleeps  too  much,  whose  blood  discharges  are  excessive, 
who  is  of  an  over  bilious,  phlegmatic  or  windy  tempera- 
ment, who  perspires  often,  who  is  of  defective  or  extra  or- 
gans and  whose  hair  is  short  or  grey; 

18-  Whose  calves  are  exceed! iigly  fleshy,  whose  belly  is 
large,  wdio  is  noisy  and  who  is  possessed  of  other  vices  des- 
cribed in  the  Chapter  on  the  features  of  women. 

19.  That  blood  is  faultless  which  resembles  the  blood 
of  the  hare  or  the  juice  of  red-cotton  and  which  when  well 
rubbed  disappears. 

20.  If  the  blood  flow  out  without  pain  and  noise,  and 
stops  after  three  days,  there  will  be  conception  at  the  next 
Ksexual  union. 


cn.  31.] 


I3rJlTx\.T  samiiita 


157 


21.  For  the  three  days  from  tlie  day  of  appearance 
of  the  menses  a woman  shall  not  bathe,  wear  flowers,  or 
sandal^  and  on  the  fourth  day  she  shall  bathe  as  prescribed 
in  the  Smritis. 

22.  After  this,  the  vegetable  ingredients  prescribed 
for  Pushja  Snana  shall  be  brought  and  put  in  water  a?id 
the  several  mantras  therein  mentioned  shall  be  pronounced 
Over  the  vessel  and  the  woman  shall  bathe  in  the  water. 

23.  On  the  even  nights  (from  the  day  of  appearance 
of  the  menses)  a woman  conceives  a male  child  and  on  the 
odd  nights^  a female  child.  If  the  conception  occur  early 
the  issue  will  be  a beautiful  child  of  long  and  happy  life. 

24.  If  the  foetus  be  on  the  right  side  the  issue  will  be 

a male  child  ; if  on, the  left  side,  it  will  be  a female  child  5 

if  on  both  sides  there  will  be  a birth  of  twins  and  if  in 

the  middle  of  the  abdomen  the  issue  will  be  a herma- 
phrodite. 

25.  A person  shall  join  a woman  in  sexual  love  when 
the  benefic  planets  occupy  the  angles  or  the  triangular 
signs  ; when  they  occupy  the  rising  sign  and  the  sign  occu- 
pied by  the  Moon  j when  malefic  planets  occupy  the  third, 
sixth  and  eleventh  houses;  and  in  male  planetary  yogas  [a). 

26.  At  the  time  of  union  a person  shall  not  wound 
a woman  with  his  nails  and  teeth  ; there  shall  be  no  union 
beyond  the  first  sixteen  days  from  the  day  of  appearauce 
of  the  menses  or  in  any  of  the  first  three  days. 

Notes. — Add  to  these  resfrictions  the  number  of  mal- 
efic planetary  yogas  described  in  Chapter  IV  of  Brihat 
J a tab  a • 

Again,  according  to  the  Sastras  a person  shall  cease  to 
cohabit  with  a woman  after  the  birth  of  a son — the  object 
of  marriage  being  thereby  secured. 


(a.)  Vide  Stanzas  11  and  12  of  Chapter  IV  of  the  Brihat  Jataka. 


153 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA 


CH.  31.] 


Agaiuj  the  Smritis  refer  to  a number  of  days  in  which 
cohabitation  is  prohibited,  such  as  the  new-moon  and  full- 
moon  days,  the  eleventh  lunar  day  and  the  like.  The  Rishis 
of  old  appear  to  have  strictly  followed  all  these  rules.  If 
the  whole  world  could  be  equally  firm^minded,  there  would 
probably  be  no  occasion  for  so  many  curious,  elaborate  and 
sometimes  even  frightful  solutions  of  the  problem  to  check 
the  growth  of  population.  You  allow  the  evil  to  grow  and 
then  seek  a remedy  ;but  the  Sastras  aim  at  nipping  the  evil 
in  the  bud.  Of  course  when  the  demand  exceeds  supply 
and  a disturbance  of  the  social  equilibrium  occurs,  nature 
restores  it  by  applying  her  own  remedy — -by  carrying  away^ 
every  now  and  then,  thousands  by  wars,  by  the  plague  and 
the  like  epidemics. 

On  the  first  appearance  of  the  menses:  The  four 
asterisms  from  Krittika  are  known  as  inner  aster- 
isms  and  the  four  from  Punarvasu  are  known  as  the 
outer  asterisms.  Again  the  four  from  Magha  are  known  as 
inner  asterisms,  and  the  four  from  Chitra  are  known  as  outer 
asterisms,  and  so  on,  till  we  come  to  the  end  of  the  lunar 
Zodiac.  For  a list  of  the  28  asterisms  tide  page  87,  Part  L 
If  the  first  appearance  of  the  menses  occur  when  the  Moon 
passes  through  one  of  the  inner  asterisms,  there  will  be 
prosperity,  increase  of  family  and  the  like.  If  the  first 
appearance  of  the  menses  occur  when  the  Moon  passes 
through  one  of  the  outer  asterisms,  there  will  be  misery, 
widowhood,  death  of  sons,  sorrow  and  the  like. 

Again,  divide  the  27  asterisms  (omitting  Abhijit)  into 
seven  groups  of  3, 3, 3, 3, 5,  7 and  3 asterisms  beginning  from 
U.  Ashadha.  If  the  first  appearance  of  the  menses  occur  in 
any  of  these,  the  effects  will  respectively  be  gain  of  wealth,- 
gain  of  sons,  servitude,  sweet  speech,  ruin,  attachment  to 
husband  and  widowhood. 


Cfi.  31.] 


B urn  AT  SAM  HIT  A 


159 


Again,  if  tlie  first  appearanco  occur  when  the  rising 
sign  is  Aries,  tlie  woman  will  become  unchaste;  when  it  is 
Taurus,  slie  will  annoy  others  ; if  Ocmini,Rhe  will  becomo 
rich  and  happy  ; if  Cancer,  she  will  cohabit  with  an  out- 
caste  ; if  Leo,  she  will  get  a son  j if  Virgo,  she  will  becomo 
rich  ; if  Libra,  she  will  become  deformed  ; if  Scorpio,  she 
will  Uccome  unchaste.  If  the  first  half  of  Sngittari,  she  will 
becomo  wicked  ; if  the  second  half,  she  will  be  chaste;  if 
Capricorn,  she  will  become  shameless;  if  Acquarius,  she  wil| 
become  poor  and  barren  ; and  if  Pisces,  she  will  become 
beautiful. 

Also,  if  the  first;  appearance  of  the  menses  occur  on  a 
Sunday,  the  woman,  will  be  afflicted  with  diseases;  if  on 
a Monday,  she  will  become  chaste ; if  Tuesday,  she  will 
suffer  grief  ; if  Wednesday,  she  will  get  sons;  if  Thursday, 
she  will  live  in  plenty  ; if  Friday^  she  will  prosper  well  ; 
and  if  on  a Saturday,  she  will  meet  with  early  death. 

Also,  if  the  first  appearance  of  the  menses  occur  in  the 
forenoon,  the  woman  will  be  happy  ; if  in  the  afternoon, 
she  will  suffer  miseries  ; if  at  noon,  she  will  be  neither 
happy  nor  miserable. 

Again,  if  the  first  appearance  of  the  menses  occur 
within  12  Ghatikas  at  night,  the  woman  will  bo  happ3^  To 
prevent  the  death  of  the  child  in.  the  womb  Sounaka  has 
prescribed  the  following  ceremony : Perform  Ajya  Homa 
(pouring  ghee  into  the  fire)  reciting  the  mantra,  commen- 
cing. 

Brahraanag  samvidanah'^  mb'  over  the  woman  a 
portion  of  the  ghee  remaining  in  the  vessel  and  cause  her 
to  bathe  and  then  drink  the  remaining  ghee. 

To  prevent  tlie  death  of  children  soon  after  birth,  Sou- 
naka  has  prescribed  an  elaborate  ceremony.  The  reader  is 
referred  to  Sounaka’s  Santi  Kalpa. 


BSIIIAT  SAMIIITA 


CH.  32.] 


]G0 

CHAPTER  XXXII  (79). 

On  Cots  and  Seats. 

].  As  Cots  and  Seats  are  useful  to  all  people  at  all 
times  and  especially  so  to  Ivings_,  I begin  to  trecit  of  them 
liere. 

2.  The  wood  of  the  following  trees  is  suited  for  the 
construction  of  Cots  and  Seats:  Asana  (a)  .Syandana,  [h) 
Chandana,  Haridra,  Suradarii  (c)  Tinduki^  Sala  (palm), 
Kasniari  {d)  Anjana,  Padmaka,  Saka,  and  Simsapa. 

3.  The  trees  described  below  sball  be  rejected  : tree 
that  have  fallen  ovNing  to  an  attack  of  lightning,  flood,  winds 
or  elephant,  those  containing  bee-hives  or  in  which  birds 
dwell,  those  that  grow  in  places  of  worship,  in  cremation 
grounds  or  in  roads,  those  whose  barks  have  dried  up  or 
which  are  covered  with  twining  creepers- 

4.  Trees  which  are  covered  wdth  thorns  or  which  grow 
at  the  junction  of  great  rivers  or  in  temples  or  which  when 
cut  fall  on  the  western  or  southern  side  shall  also  be  rejec“ 
ted. 

5.  If  Cots  and  Seats  be  made  of  such  trees,  the  family 
will  suffer  miseries  and  there  will  be  diseases,  fear,  loss 
quarrels,  and  the  like. 

6.  If  there  be  the  wood  of  any  trees  already  cut  down 
available  for  the  purpose  it  shall  first  be  examined  : if  a 
child  gets  on  it,  a person  will  get  cows  and  children  by  its 
use 

7.  If  white  flowers,  a rutting  elephant,  curdled  milk, 
colored  rice,  water  pots,  gems  and  the  like  benefic  objects 
be  observed  at  the  time,  there  will  be  prosperity. 

(a).  Asana,  the  tree  Terminalia  Tomentosa. 

(h).  Syandana  : the  tree  Dalbergia  Ongeinensis. 

(c).  Snradaru  : the  Devadani ; piee  ; Finns  Decdera. 

{(i).  Kasniari : the  tree  Gmeliiia  Arborca . The  other  terms  hayo 
already  been  explained. 


Bill  HAT  SAM  HIT  A 


IGl 


CH.  32.] 


8.  The  length  of  8 grains  of  barley  rice  placed  close 
and  parallel  to  one  another,  is  known  as  the  Carpenter’s  inch  ; 
the  length  of  the  king’s  cot  shall  bo  100  such  inches. 

9.  The  Cots  of  the  first  Prince,  the  Minister,  the 
Commander  in  Chief  and  the  Priest  shall  respectively  be  90^ 
84^78 and  72  inches  long. 

10.  The  breadth  of  the  Cot  shall  be  yeths  of  the  length, 
according  to  Viswakarma ; and  the  height  of  the  legs  shall 
be  a third  of  the  length. 

11.  If  the  Cots  be  wholly  made  of  the  wood  of  Sree- 
parni,  or  Tinduka  there  will  be  acquisition  of  wealth,  and 
if  made  of  Asana,  there  will  be  health. 

12.  If  the  Cot  be  wholly  made  of  the  wood  of  Simsupa? 
there  will  be  prosperity  in  various  ways;  if  of  Sandal,  a 
person  will  be  freed  from  troubles  from  his  enemies,  and  will, 
live  long,  leading  a life  of  virtue  and  renown. 

13.  If  the  Cot  be  wholly  made  of  the  wood  of  Pad- 
maka,  there  will  be  long  life,  prosperity,  wealth  and  skill 
in  the  use  of  weapons ; if  of  the  wood  of  Saka  or  Sala  there 
will  be  happiness. 

14.  A king  who  uses  a Cot  made  wholly  of  Sandal 
wood  and  covered  with  gold  set  with  various  gems  will  bo 
honored  even  by  Devas. 

15.  If  the  wood  of  the  Tinduki,  Simsapa,  Sreeparni, 
Devadaru  or  Asana  be  coupled  with  other  wood  it  will  not 
conduce  to  prosperity. 


16.  The  wood  of  Saka  and  Sala  may  be  used  either 
separately  or  jointly.  The  same  remark  applies  to  the 
wood  of  Haridra  and  Kadamba. 

17.  A Cot  made  wholly  of  the  wood  of  Syandana  wdll 
not  conduce  to  prosperity  ; one  made  wholly  of  the  wood 
of  Amba  will  bring  on  death  and  one  made  of  the  wood 

21 


102  BRIHAT  SAMHITA  CH.  32.} 

ofAsana  coupled  with  other  wood  will  bring  on  nume- 
rous miseries. 

18.  If  the  legs  be  made  of  the  wood  of  Syandanuj, 
Amba  or  Chandaua^  they  will  conduce  to  prosperity.  Cots 
and  seats  made  wholly  of  the  wood  of  fruit  trees  will  also 
conduce  to  prosperity. 

19.  Cots  made  of  wood  and  set  with  ivory  are  excel- 
lent; various  oruametital  works  shall  be  done  in  ivory. 

20.  In  cutting  ivory  a length  equal  to  double  the 
circumference  at  the  root  of  the  tusks  shall  be  left;  if  the 
elephant  be  one  dwelling  on  water  banks  a larger  portion 
shall  be  left  and  if  it  be  one  dwelling  in  the  mountains  a 
smaller  portion  may  be  left. 

21.  If,  in  the  ent,  there  be  lines  of  the  shape  of  the 
cross  or  a dish^  an  umbrella,  a flag-staff,  or  a Chamara 
there  will  respectively  be  health,  success,  wealth,  prosperity 

and  comfort. 

22.  If  the  lines  be  of  the  shape  of  a weapon  there 
will  be  success;  if  quadraugular  in  shape  the  king  will  re- 
cover a lost  country.  And  if  of  the  shape  of  a clod,  he  will 
recover  a country  obtained  and  lost. 

23.  If  the  lines  be  of  the  shape  of  a woman  there 
will  be  loss  of  wealth  ; if  of  the  shape  of  a golden  pitcher, 
the  king  will  get  sons  ; if  of  the  shape  of  a pot  ^ he  will  get 
hidden  treasure,  and  if  of  the  shape  of  a club  his  intended 
journey  will  be  stopped. 

24.  If  the  lines  be  of  the  shape  of  a bloodsucker,  a 
monkey,  or  a snake  there  will  be  dearth  and  disease,  and  the 
king  will  fall  into  the  bands  of  his  enemies^  and  if  the  lines 
be  of  the  shape  of  a vulture,  an  owl,  a crow,  a hawk,  the 
king’s  subjects  will  suffer  from  plague. 

25.  If  the  lines  be  of  the  shape  of  a rope  or  a head- 
less trunk  the  king  wall  die  or  his  subjects  will  suffer  mise- 


CEi.  32  ] 


BRIHAT  SAMIIITA 


1G3 


lies  respectively  ; if  blood  comes  ont^  or  if  the  cut  be  black 
or  red-black  or  of  disagreeable  appearance  or  of  bad  smell 
there  will  be  misery. 

2G.  If  the  cut  be  white^  eveiij  glossy  and  of  good 
smell  there  will  be  prosperity.  The  effects  ascribed  to  the 
cutting  of  ivory  apply  also  to  the  cutting  of  wood  for  cots 
and  the  like. 

27.  In  joining  the  beams  of  abed-stead  the  ends  shall 
be  made  to  come  round  from  left  to  riglitj(a)  if  the  re- 
verse  be  the  case  or  if  the  ends  do  not  point  to  all  the  four 
quarters  there  will  be  an  attack  of  evil  spirits. 

■V 

28.  If  a single  leg  should  have  its  end  pointing  to  the 
ground;  the  person  will  suffer  injuries  to  his  leg;  if  two 
legs  should  be  so,  he  will  suffer  from  indigestion  j and  if 
three  or  four,  he  will  suffer  from  grief  or  be  killed  or  im- 
prisoned. 

29.  If  the  knot  at  the  top  of  the  leg  be  found  with  a 
hole  or  of  a bad  color  there  will  be  suffering  from  disease, 
and  if  there  be  a knot  at  the  centre  of  the  leg  tliere  will  bo 
suffering  from  belly-ache. 

30.  If  there  be  a knot  just  below  the  centre  the 
master  will  suffer  injuries  to  his  shauks  ; if  the  kuot  be  a 
little  lower  down  be  will  suffer  loss  of  wealth. 

1.  If  there  be  a knot  at  the  foot  of  the  leer  hoofed 
animals  will  suffer;  if  there  be  three  knots  in  the  frames 
there  will  be  much  suffering. 

82.  The  holes  in  the  four  frames  of  a bedstead  are 
of  G sorts,  known  as  Nishknta,  Kolaksha,  Sukaranayana, 
Yatsanabha,  Kalaka,  and  Dhundhuka. 

33.  A hole  which  is  large  within  and  with  a small 
mouth  thus  resembling  a pot  is  knowui  as  Nishkotaja 

(a).  The  end  of  the  northern  frame  shall  point  to  the  east,  that  of 
the  eastern  one  shall  point  to  the  south  and  so  on. 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA 


1G4 


CH.  38.] 


black  hole  of  the  size  of  a grain  of  black  gram  is  known 
as  kolaksha. 

84.  An  irregular  hole  which  is  of  one  of  the  main  co- 
lors and  whose  length  is  that  of  a finger  joint  and  a half 
is  known  as  Sukaranayana  and  one  which  turns  from  right 
to  left^  which  is  split  and  of  the  length  of  a finger  joint  is 
known  as  Vatsanabha. 

35.  A black  hole  is  known  as  kalaka  and  one  which 
is  split  is  known  as  Dhundhnka.  Generally  if  the  holes  be 
of  the  color  of  the  wood,  they  do  not  point  to  evil. 

36.  A Nishknta  hole  will  bring  loss  of  wealth,  a Kola- 
ksha hole  will  bring  the  ruin  of  the  family;  a Sukara  hole 
will  bring  fear  and  injury  from  weapons,  and  a Yatsanabha 
hole  will  bring  suffering  from  disease. 

37.  Kalaka  and  Dhundhunka  holes  as  well  as  a hole 
caused  by  worms  will  not  conduce  to  prosperity  ; if  the 
holes  be  in  knotty  parts,  the  wood  is  fit  for  no  purpose. 

38.  If  the  Cot,  Seat,  and  the  like  be  made  of  one  wood 
of  fruit  trees,  there  will  be  gain  of  wealth ; if  of  two  sorts 
of  wood  there  will  be  great  gain  of  wealth  , if  of  three,  sons 
will  increase,  and  if  of  four,  the  person  will  become  wealthy 
and  famous, 

39.  If  the  Cot  be  made  of  five  different  sorts  of  wood 
of  fruit  trees,  the  person  sleeping  on  it  will  meet  with  death  ; 
and  if  it  be  made  of  six,  seven  or  eight  different  sorts  of 
wood,  his  family  will  suffer  ruin. 


CHAPTER  XXXIII.  (80). 

On  Diamonds. 

1.  A good  gem  brings  prosperity  to  the  king  and  a 
bad  one  brings  misery.  It  is  therefore  necessary  to  ex- 
amine the  properties  of  gems  wdtli  the  help  of  persons  learn- 
ed in  the  science ; for  a person’s  fortune  depends  upon  the 
gems  he  possesses. 


CH.  oS.] 


ERIE  AT  SAM  II  IT  A 


165 


2.  Eleplmnts,  horses  and  women  possessed  of  excel- 
lent virtues  are  also  known  as  gems  j but  diamonds  and  the 
like  gems  to  be  treated  of  in  this  Chapter  are  stones  and 
the  like  possessed  of  many  excellent  qualities. 

3.  According  to  some,  gems  are  the  bones  of  Bahisura 
and  according  to  others  they  are  the  bones  of  the  sage  Da- 
dhichi.  In  the  opinion  of  some,  gems  are  various  sorts  of 
stones  which  naturally  .exist  in  the  earth. 

4.  Twenty-two  different  sorts  of  gems  are  mentioned: 
These  are  the  diamonds,  sapphire,  emerald,  karketana,  ruby, 
rudhira,  vydurya,  pulaka,  vimalaka,  rajamani,  crystal  or 
quartz,  moon-stone.  ' 

5.  Sougandhika,  gomedaka,  conch-shell,  mahanila,  to- 
paz, brahma-mani,  jyotirasa,  opal,  pearls  and  corals. 

6.  Diamonds  found  on  the  banks  of  the  river  Yena  are 
white  ; those  found  in  the  province  of  Oudh  are  somewhat 
yellow;  diamonds  found  in  Surat  are  somewhat  of  the  color 
of  copper  and  those  of  Supa  are  black. 

7.  The  Himalayan  diamonds  are  somewhat  of  the  color 
of  copper  and  those  found  in  the  Matanga  mountains  are 
somewhat  yellow.  Gan  jam  di  amends  are  also  yellow.  Ben- 
gal and  Behar  diamonds  are  green. 

8.  A diamond  which  is  white  and  has  six  sides  is 
sacred  to  Indra ; one  that  is  black  and  of  the  shape  of  tlie 
mouth  of  the  serpent  is  sacred  to  Yama  ; one  that  is  green 
and  of  various  shapes  is  sacred  to  Yishnu. 

9.  A diamond  which  is  of  the  shape  of  a female’s  geni- 
tal organ  and  of  the  color  of  the  flower  of  karnikara  (Pteros" 
perrnum  Acerifolium)  is  sacred  to  Yaruna;one  that  is  of 
the  shape  of  the  fruit  of  Sringataka  (Trapa  Bispiuosa)  and  of 
the  color  of  the  eves  of  the  tiger  is  sacred  to  Agni. 

10.  A diamond  which  is  of  the  shape  of  a grain  o^ 
barley  and  of  the  color  of  the  flower  of  the  Asoka  is  sacred 


ERIHAT  SAMHITA 


166 


CE.  o3.] 


to  Vayu  (a)  Diamonds  are  generally  found  in  rivers,  lakes, 
deep  or  marsky  places. 

11.  The  Kshatriyas  shall  wear  red  or  yellow  dia- 
monds ; the  Brahmins  shall  wear  white  diamonds;  the  Vysi- 
as  shall  wea»'  diamonds  which  are  slighty  yellow  and  the 
Sudras  shall  wear  those  which  are  black. 

12  & 13.  Eight  mustard  seeds  (white)  make  a Tandula. 
The  price  of  a diamond  weighing  20  Tandulas  is  200,000 
Karsh apanas ; (h)  and  the  price  of  diamonds  weighing  two 
tandulas  less  and  less  are  respectively  three  fourths, 
two-thirds,  one-half,  one-third,  one-fifth,  one-sixteenth^ 
one  twent3^-fifth,  one-hundredth  and  one-thousandth  parts 
of  200,000  Karshapanas. 

Notes.  The  following  table  shews  the  price  of  dia- 
' mouds  : — • 


Weight  in 

Price  in  K ara. 

Weight  in 

Price  in  Kara- 

Tandulas. 

shapanas. 

Tandulas. 

shapauas. 

20 

200,000 

10 

40,000 

18 

150,000 

8 

12,500 

16 

133,333 

() 

8,000 

14 

100,000 

4 

2,000 

12 

66,666 

0 

u 

200 

For  intermediate  weight,  the  price  shall  be  deter- 
mined by  proportion. 

14.  A superior  diamond  is  one  which  cannot  be  bro- 
ken with  any  other  substance,  which  is  light  and  dazzling, 
which  is  of  the  color  of  lightning,  fire  or  rain-bow  and  which 
floats  in  water.  It  always  brings  prosperity. 

.15.  The  faults  of  the  diamond  are,  lines  of  the  shape 
of  the  foot  of  the  crow,  a fly  or  a hare  or  being  mixed  with 
other  minerals,  or  covered  with  holes  like  gravel,  being 
with  split  ends,  appearing  soiled  or  with  dark  spots  and 


(a)  The  mantras  sacred  to  particular  devas  shall  first  be  pronounced 
and  the  diamonds  sliall  then  be  worn. 

(h).  A Karshapana  is  20  Ks.  as  it  obtains  among  merchants.  It  is  a 
gold  coin  whose  weight  is  16  Mashas  equal  to  one-fourth  pala. 


CH.  34.] 


ERIIIAT  SAMHITA 


1G7 


bein"  of  unsteady  light  or  split  or  broken.  Such  diamonds 
are  not  fit  for  use. 

Id.  Diamonds  with  babbles  or  split  ends  or  flat  and 
long  shall  be  priced  one-eighth  less  than  tbe  price  assigned 

• 

17.  Persons  learned  in  the  science  say  that  a woman 
desirous  of  sons  shall  wear  diamonds.  According  to  some 
diamonds  are  not  to  be  worn  at  all ; diamonds  of  the  shape 
of  the  fruit  of  Sringata,  of  the  pulse,  of  the  coriander  seed, 
and  of  tbe  hip-bone  shall  be  worn  by  women  desirous  of  sons. 

18.  A person  wearing  bad  diamonds,  will  lose  his  peo- 
ple, wealth  and  life.  Good  diamonds  worn  by  kings  will  free 
them  from  the  attack^oflightning,  poison,  and  enemies  and 
will  bring  great  prosperity. 

CHAPTER  XXXIY  (81). 

On  Peaels. 

1.  Pearls  are  produced  in  elephants,  serpents,  oyster- 

shells,  fish,  clouds,  bamboos,  whales,  and  boars.  Of  these, 
pearls  of  the  oyster-fish  are  produced  in  abundance  and  are 
beautiful. 

2.  Ceylon,  the  island  of  Paraloukika,  Surat,  the  Tam- 
braparni  river,  Persia,  the  isle  of  Kubera,  the  country  of 
Pandyavata  aud  the  Himalayas,  are  places  in  which  pearls 
are  largely  found. 

3.  The  pearls  of  Ceylon  are  of  various  shapes,  glossy^ 
of  the  color  of  the  swan  and  large.  The  pearls  found  in 
the  mouths  of  the  Tambraparni  are  white  or  slightly  copper 
colored  and  pure. 

4.  The  pearls  of  the  isle  of  Paraloukika  are  black, 
white  or  yellow,  mixed  with  minerals  and  rough;  the  pearls 
of  Surat  are  neitiier  very  large  nor  very  small  and  of  the 
color  of  butter. 

5.  Persian  pearls  are  bright,  white,  heavy,  and  of 
excellent  qualities.  The  Himalayan  pearls  are  light,  bi'ittle, 
of  the  color  of  curdled  milk,  large,  and  of  various  shapes. 


IGS 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA 


CH.  34.] 


G.  The  pearls  of  the  isle  of  Kubera  are  rough,  black, 
white,  light,  large  and  bright;  and  those  of  Pandya  Yataka 
are  of  the  color  of  the  fruit  of  the  margosa,  resembling  a 
pulse  or  the  coriander  seed. 

7.  Pearls  which  are  blue  are  sacred  to  Yishnu  and 
those  which  are  white*dike  the  Moon|are"sacred  to  Indra  ; 
those  which  are  yellow  are  sacred  to»Yaruaa  and  those 
which  are  black  are  sacred  to  Yama. 

8.  Pearls  which ’’are^  red  like  the  ripe  fruits  of  the 

pomegranate  or  the  cocoon  of  the  silk  worm  or  the  gunja 

seeds  CAbrus«  Precatorius)  are  sacred  to  Yayu  and  those 

which  are  of  tlie^  color  of^the  flame  of  fire  or  of  the  lotus 

flower  are  sacred  to  Agni. 

\ 

9.  Tlie  price  of  a superior  pearl  weighing  four  Mas- 
has {a)  is  .5,300  karshapanas. 

10.  The  prices  of  pearls^  weighing  half  a masha  less 
and  less  are  respectively  3,200,  2,000,  1,200,  800,  and  353 
karshapanas. 

11 . The  price  of  a single  pearl  which  is  a masha  in 
weight  is  135  Karshapanas,  and  the  price  of  a pearl  which  is 
4 gunjas  in  weight  is  90  karshapanas,  and  that  of  one  which 
is  gunjas  in  weight  is  70  karshapanas. 

12.  The  price  of  a pearl  which  is  3 ganjas  in  weight 
is  50  karshapanas,  and  the  price  of  a pearl  which  is  2|  gun- 
jas in  weight  is  35  karshapanas. 

13.  One-tenth  of  a pala  is  known  as  a Dharana.  The 
price  of  a collection  or  string  of  13  good  pearls  weighing  a 
Dharana  is  325  karshapanas. 

14.  The  price  of  a string  "of  16  pearls’ weighing  a 
Dharana  is  200  karshapanas;  of  20  pearls  of  the  same  weight 
is  170  karshapanas  ; of  25  pearls  of  the  same  weight  is  130 
karshapanas. 


(a).  A masha  is  equal  to  5 gurvja  seeds  or  eocfl. 


CH.  o4.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA 


1C9 

15.  The  price  of  a string  of  30 'superior  pearls  weigh- 
ing a Dharana  is  70  karshapanas.  One  of  40  pearls  of  the 
same  weight  is  50  karshapanas  and  one  of^55  pearls  of  the 
same  weight  is  40  karshapanas. 

1C.  The  price  of  a string  of  80  pearls  weighing  a 
Dharana  is  30  karshapanas  ; that  of  a string  of  100  pearls 
of  the  same  weight  is  25  karshapanas  ; of  200  pearls  of  the 
same  weight  is  12  karshapanas  ; of  300  pearls^  6 karshapa- 
nas ; of  400,  5 karshapanas^  and  of  500,  3 karshapanas* 

17.  A collection  or  string  of  13  pearls  weighing  a 
Dharana  is  known  as  Pikka ; one  of  16  pearls  of  the  same 
weight  is  known  as  xPiccha  ; one  of  20  pearls  is  known  as 
Aid'ia  ; one  of  25  is  known  as  Argha  , one  of  30  as  Kavaka  ; 
one  of  40  as  Sikta ; one  of  55  as  Nigra ; one  of  from  80  to 
500  pearls  is  known  as  Churna. 

Notes. 

According  to  Buddha  Bhata  the  price  of  a superior 
pearl  weighing  5 mashas  is  double  the  price  of  one  weighing 
4 mashas,  and  the  price  of  a pearl  weighing  6 mashas  is 
double  the  price  of  one  of  5 mashas,  and  so  on,  doubling  the 
price  for  each  additional  weight  of  a raasha. 

18.  Thus  have  I described  the  price  of  various  collec- 
tions of  superior  pearls  weighing  a Dharana.  The  prices  of 
collections  of  pearls  of  intermediate  numbers  shall  he  ascer- 
tained by  proportion*  If  the  pearls  be  not  of  superiorqua- 
lity,  the  price  shall  be  reduced. 

19.  If  these  superior  pearls  be  black  or  white  or 
slightly  rough  the  price  shall  be  reduced  by  a third  ; if  they 
be  only  very  rough  the  price  shall  be  reduced  by  a sixth  ; 
and  if  yellow  by  one-half. 

20.  An  elephant  of  the  Iravata  family  born  when  the 
Moon  passess  through  the  asterism  of  Pushya  or  Sravana, 
on  a Sunday  or  Monday  in  the  Uttarayana  (i.  e.  when  the 


170  BmHAT  SAMHITA.  [CH.  S'4. 

Sun  passes  from  sign  Capricorn  to  sign  Cancer)  and  at  the 
solar  or  lunar  eclipse  is  known  as  Bhadra. 

21.  Pearls  which  are  bright,  of  various  shapes  and 
large  are  produced  in  large  quantities  in  the  tusksy  testi 
cles  and  crests  of  the  Bhadra  elephant. 

22-  These  pearls  cannot  be  valued  and  cannot  be 
bored  through.  They  are  exceedingly  bright  and  will  bring 
to  the  wearer  success,  health  and  sons,  and  make  him  pure* 
They  are  fit^o  be  worn  by  kings. 

23.  Pearls  of  superior  qualities  and  of  the  color  of  the 
moon  are  produced  at  the  roots  of  the  hog’s  teeth  and  pearls 
of  good  qualities  and  which  are  large,  pure,  and  of  the^  shape 
of  the  eye  of  the  fish  are  found  in  whales. 

24.  Pearls  of  the  shape  of  the  hail  and  which  fall  from 
the  seventh  region  of  the  atmosphere  and  resembling  the 
lightning  are  produced  in  clouds;  they  are  carried  away  by 
the  Devas. 

25.  Pearls  are  also  produced  in  the  heads  of  serpents 
of  the  family  of  Takshaka  and  Vasuki ; they  are  black  and 
glossy. 

26.  When  the  rain-fall  occurs  out  of  season,  pearls 
which  fall  from  the  sky  into  vessels  of  silver  placed  on  pure 
spots  are  known  as  Naga  pearls. 

Kotes. — According  to  Buddha  Bhata  rain  may  be  pro- 
duced in  the  dry  season  as  follows  : the  priest  shall,  after 
bathing,  and  in  an  auspicious  hour  get  to  the  tops  of  storied 
buildings  whose  floor  reflects  the  sky  above  and  shall  recite 
aloud  mantras  accompanied  by  the  music  of  the  Dandubhi. 
Heavy  rain  will  fall. 

27.  The  Naga  pearls  worn  by  kings  bring  to  them 
success,  renown,  the  ruin  of  the  enemy  and  freedom  from 
misery. 


cn.  3-i.] 


BRIHAT  BAMHITA. 


171 


28.  Pearls  produced  in  bamboos  aro  of  tbe  color  of . 
camphor  or  crystal^  and  are  flat  and  rough.  Those  produced 
in  conch-shell  are  of  the  color  of  the  Moon  and  round,  bright 
and  beautiful. 

29.  Pearls  produced  ie  conch-shells,  whales,  bamboos., 
elephants,  hogs,  serpents  and  clouds  are  not  to  be  bored 
through.  As  they  are  of  very  superior  qualities,  the  Sastras 
have  not  stated  their  value. 

30.  All  these  are'pearls  of  superior  qualities,  and  they 
make  the  wearer  wise,  wealthy,  happy  and  renowned,  free 
liiin  from  diseases  and  grief  and  secure  for  kings  the  ob- 
ject of  their  desire. 

31.  A collect ioh  of  pearls  consisting  of  1,008  strings, 
each  4 cubits  long  is  known  as  Indra  Chhanda.  This  must 
be  used  as  ornaments  for  the  Devas  only.  A collection  of 
pearls  consisting  of  504  strings  each  2 cubits  long  is  known 
as  Yijaya  Chhanda. 

32.  A collection  of  pearls  consisting  of  108  strings 
each  2 cubits  long  is  known  as  a Hara;  one  of  81  strings  of 
the  same  length  is  known  as  Deva  Chhanda;  one  of  64 
strings  is  known  as  Ardha-hara ; and  one  of  54  is  known 
as  Rasmi  Kalapa. 

33.  A collection  of  pearls  consisting  of  32  strings  each 
2 cubits  long  is  known  as  Guccha;  one  of  20  strings  is 
known  as  Ardha- Guccha  ; one  of  16  as  Manavaka  ,*  and  one 
of  12  as  Ardhamanavaka. 

34.  A collection  of  pearls  consisting  of  8 strings  each 
two  cubits  long  is  known  as  Maudara,  and  one  of  5 strings 
is  known  as  Haraphalaka  and  a necklace,  a cubit  in  length, 
consisting  of  a string  of  27  pearls  is  known  as  a Nakshatra 
M^ala. 

35.  A Nakshtra  Mala  with  gems  or  gold  beads  be- 
tween the  pearls  is  known  as  Manisopana.  A Manisopana 
with  a central  gem  is  known  as  Chatakara* 


172 


BRIEAT  SAMHlTA. 


CH.  o5.]' 


86.  A necklace^  a cubit  in  leugtb  and  consisting  of 
an  indefinite  number  of  pearls  is  known  as  Ekavali.  An 
Ekavali  with  a central  gem  is  known  as  Yashti  among 
Jewel-merchants. 


CHAPTER  XXXV  (82). 

On  Rubies. 

1.  Rubies  are  formed  from  Sougandhika,  from  Kuru- 
vinda,  and  from  crystals.  The  Sougandhika  rubies  are  of 
the  color  of  the  bee,  collyrium,  clouds  or  the  fruit  of  the 
rose-apple,  and  are  glossy. 

2.  The  Kuruvinda  rubies  are  of  the  color  of  the  mix. 
ture  of  black  and  white,  somewhat  bright  and  mixed  with 
minerals,  and  the  crystalline  rubies  are  bright,  pure  and  of 
diSerent  colors. 

3.  Rubies  of  superior  quality  are  bright,  glossy,  pure, 
red,  and  rendering  red  objects  around,  dazzling,  heavy, 
well-shaped  and  of  good  water. 

4.  Gems  that  are  dim,  slightly  bright,  with  lines, 
mixed  with  minerals  or  with  gravel,  or  broken  are  not  good 
ones.  These  are  the  faults  of  gems. 

5.  A gem  of  the  color  of  the  bee,  the  neck  of  the 
peacock  or  the  tip  of  flame,  if  found  in  the  head  of  a ser- 
pent has  no  value. 

6.  A king  who  wears  such  a gem  will  never  suffer 
from  the  attacks  of  poison  and  disease.  There  will  be  rain- 
fall in  his  countn’y  every  day  in  the  year  and  the  king’s 
enemies  will  meet  with  ruin — all  this  through  the  virtues 
of  the  gem* 

7.  The  price  of  a ruby  weighing  a pala  is  26,000 
karshapanas,  and  the  price  of  a ruby  weighing  three  kar- 
shas  (a)  [J  of  a pala]  is  20,000  karshapanas. 


faj.  16  Mashas  = I karsha. 
4 Kaishas=>^l  pala. 


^11.  8G.] 


BRIIIAT  SAMIIITA, 


173 


8.  If  the  weiglit  bo  two  karslias  (2-  a pala)  the  price  is 
12j000  k.  paoas  ; if  the  weight  bo  a karsha,  the  price  is 
6^000  k.  panas,  aud  it  the  weight  be  8 Mashas^  the  price  is 
,000  k.  panas. 

9.  If  the  w^oight  be  4 Mashas,  the  price  is  1^000  k. 
panas^  and  if  it  be  2 Mashas,  the  price  is  500  k.  panas.  For 
rubies  of  intermediate  weight,  the  price  shall  be  ascertained 
by  proportion.  The  price  of  rubies  which  fall  a little  short 
of  being  superior  rubies  is  as  follows  : 

10.  If  the  fault  be  a defect  in  color,  the  price  shall 
be  reduced  to  one-half ; if  the  gem  be  not  bright  and 
glossy,  the  price  shall  be  reduced  to  one-eighth,  and  if  the 
gem  2)ossess  very  few  good  qualities  but  many  faults_,  the 
price  shall  be  reduced  to  one-twentieth. 

11.  If  the_.gem  be  wholly  red  black  and  full  of  wounds 
and  if  the  good  qualities  be  very  few,  the  price  shall  be  re- 
duced to  a two-hundredth  part.  Thus  has  been  described 
the  valuation  of  rubies  by  the  ancient  writers. 


CHAPTER  XXXYI  (83). 

On  Emeralds. 

. Emeralds  of  the  col  or  of  the  parrot,  the  leaves  of 
the  bamboo,  the  bark  of  the  plantain  and  the  flower  of  Si- 
risha  (Acacia  Sirisa)  and  of  good  quality  will  conduce  to 
prosjDerit}^  if  they  are  worn  by  men  on  occasions  of  worship 
of  the  Devas  and  thePitris. 

Notes- 

Emeralds  are  to  be  valued  in  the  same  way  as  rubies. 
According  to  Eudhabhata,  the  five  chief  gems  are  diamonds^ 
pearls,  rubies,  emeralds  and  sapphires.  Sapphires  must  be 
examined  in  the  same  way  as  rubies.  Malianila  i>  a gem 
which  when  Iput  into  milk  turns  it  blue.  The  price  of 


174 


KRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  37. 


a ruby  weigbing  a Masha  is  the  price  of  a sapphire  weighing 
a Swarna  (a). 

Vydurya  (the  cat’s-eye  gem)  is  of  the  color  of  the  tail 
of  the  peacock_,  the  leaves  of  the  bamboo  or  the  wing  of  the 
king-fisher.  It  is  to  be  valued  in  the  same  way  as  sap- 
phires. 

Karketana  gems  are  bright,  glossy,  pure,  yellow  and 
heavy.  The  usual  test  of  its  superiority  is  to  cover  the 
stone  with  gold  leaf  and  put  it  in  fire.  The  gem  will  be- 
come black  but  will  not  lose  its  gloss.  The  whole  Earth 
might  be  given  for  this  gena. 

Crystal  gems  are  white  like  the  stem  of  the  lotus  or 
the  conch-shell. 

Corals  are  glossy,  pure  and  red.  The  wearer  will  be- 
come wealthy  and  will  be  freed  from  poison. 

Eudhiraksha  gems  are  green  in  the  middle,  white  all 
round,  as  bright  as  sapphire,  of  the  shape  of  the  fruit  of 
the  Pilu  tree  (Carea  Arborea).  It  will  make  the  wearer 
wealthy  and  well-served.  For  further  particulars  regarding 
gems,  the  reader  is  referred  to  the  works  of  Buddhabhata* 


CHAPTEE  XXXVII  (84). 

On  Lamps. 

1.  A lamp  whose  flame  turns  from  right  to  left,  whose 
light  is  dim  and  small,  and  emits  sparks  and  which  dies  out 
even  when  the  oil  and  the  wick  are  pure  indicates  evil.  A 
lamp  whose  flame  is  quivering,  spreading  and  attended 
with  noise  and  which  dies  out  in  the  absence  of  the  fly  or 
the  wind  also  indicates  evil. 

2.  If  the  flame  be  close  and  united,  long,  still,  bright_, 
without  noise,  beautiful,  turning  from  left  to  right  and  of 

C (0 . Swarna  « 1 Karsha  = 16  Mashas  = 80  Raktikas  = about  175  grains 
Troy. 


CH.  S8.] 


BBIHAT  SAMHITA. 


175 


the  color  of  vydiirya  or  gold^  it  indicates  approaching  pros- 
perity. In  other  respects  all  that  has  been  said  in  the  case 
of  fire  applies  here  also. 


CHAPTER  XXXVIIl  (85). 

On  Tooth-brush. 

1.  Tooth-brush  may  be  made  of  the  twigs  of  spread- 
ing creepers,  creepers,  shrubs  and  trees.  A description  of 
all  their  effects  will  be  long  and  elaborate.  We  shall  ther€>- 
fore  confine  ourself^  to  twigs  which  are  to  be  chewed  to 
secure  certain  special  ends. 

2.  Twigs  of  unknown  trees  shall  be  rejected,  and 
twigs  with  leaves,  those  of  an  even  number  of  joints,  those 
which  are  split  or  dry  at  the  ends  and  those  with  no  bark 
ought  not  to  be  chewed. 

3.  The  twigs  of  Vikankata  fa},  Sriphala  (h),  and  Kas- 
inari  (c),  if  chewed,  will  give  a person  Brahminical  splen- 
dour. The  twigs  of  Kshema  will  secure  to  a person  a good 
wife.  The  twigs  of  the  banyan  will  increase  a person’s 
wealth  and  stock  of  grain.  The  Arka  twig  will  increase 
the  splendour  of  his  appearance.  The  Madbuka  twig  will 
give  him  a son^  The  Kakubha  will  add  to  his  joy. 

4.  The  twigs  of  Sirisha  and  Karanja  if  used  as  tooth- 
brush will  make  a person  wealthy  and  prosperous.  Those 
of  Plaksha  will  bring  him  money.  Those  of  Aswattha  will 
make  him  respected  by  the  people  and  renowned  among  his 
own  caste-men. 


(a).  Yikankata  : Flaconrtia  Sapida. 

(h) . Sriphala  : the  Bilwa  tree. 

(c),  Kasmari  : the  plant  Gmelina  Arborea, 


176 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA 


CH.  38,] 


5.  The  twig  of  the  Badari  if  chewed  as  a tootli-brush 
will  make  a person  healthy  ; that  of  the  Brihati  {a)  will 
give  him  a long  life  ; that  of  the  Khadira  and  Bilwa  will 
increase  his  wealth  ; that  of  the  Atimukta  and  Kadamba 
will  bring  him  the  object  of  his  desire. 

().  The  twig  of  the  Nimba  if  chewed  as  a tooth-brush 
will  bring  wealth  to  a person  ; that  of  the  Karavira  will 
bring  him  good  meals  ; that  of  the  Bhandira  (&)  wiirbring 
him  much  food;  that  of  the  Sami,  Ai  juna  and  Syama  will 
destroy  his  enemies. 

7.  The  twig  of  Aswakarna,  Bhadrataru  C^)  an  d 
Chatarushaka  if  chewed  as  a tooth-brush  will  bring  a man 
dignity;  those  of  Priyangu,  (<i)  Apamarga,  Jambu  and  Dadi- 
ma  will  make  a person  beloved  of  all  people. 

8.  Facing  the  north  or  the  east^  a person  shall  chew  the 
tooth-brush  and  cleanse  his  teeth,  for  a year,  firmly  placing 
before  his  mind  his  object  of  desire.  He  shall,  after  its 
use,  wash  the  tooth-brush  with  water  and  throw  it  in  a 
pure  spot. 

9.  If  the  tooth-brush  when  thrown  away  after  its  use  be 
seen  to  stick  to  the  ground  with  one  end  while  the  other  end 
points  to  him  and  in  a Santa  (benefic)  quarter  (vide  stanza 
12,  next  Chap.)  prosperity  is  indicated;  if  it  should  stick  for 
a time  and  then  fall,  the  person  will  get  good  meals  and  if 
it  fall  otherwise  the  person  will  suffer  miseries. 

(a).  Brihati  : the  Egg  plant. 

The  other  trees  occurring  in  this  Chapter  have  already  been  ex- 
plained. Vide  Glossary  of  Botanical  terms — pages  66  to  74.  Part  II. 

(Ij) . Bhandira:  Eubia  Munjistta. 

(c) .  Bhadrataru;  the  plant  Trap  a Bispinosa. 

(d) .  Apamarga  ; the  plant  Achyranthes  Aspera, 


cir.  £9.] 


brihat  sAmiiita. 


177 


On  Omens  Exhaustively  Treated. 

I 

CHAPTER  XXXIX  (86). 

General  Rules. 

1.  Risliablia  has  written  a treatise  on  omens  embody- 
ing the  views  of  the  Devas  Sukra,  Indra,  Brihnspati, 
Kapishthala  and  Garnda  and  of  the  Rishis  Bhaguri,  Devala 
and  others. 

2.  Si’idevavardhanaj  the  Maharaja  of  Avanti  (Oojien^ 
has  written  a treatise]  on  omens  embodying  the  views  of 
Bharadwaja. 

a:- 

There  are  also  treatises  on  omens  byHhe  seven  Ri- 
shis ; numerous  treatises  are  also  found  on  the  subject 
written  in  ancient  and  modern  languages.  Then  there  are 
the  treatises  of  Garga  and  others  who  have  written  works 
on  Samhita.  There  are  also  treatises  written  by  writers 
who  have  written  works  on  Yatra. 

4.  Having  examined  all  the  above  treatises  I proceed 
to  write  clearly  this  brief  treatise  on  omens  for  the  enlighten  _ 
ment  of  my  pupils. 

5.  Omens  indicate  to  travellers  the  good  or  evil  effects 
of  their  harma  (deeds)  in  a former  birth. 

6.  Omens  are  creatures  dwelling  in  villages  and  forests 

o o ^ 

in  waters/in  land,  in  the  sky,  moving  by  day  or  by  night 
or  by  both  day  and  night.  Their  sex  shall  be  ascertained  by 
their  sound,  gait,  look  and  speech. 

7.  It  is  often  difficult  to  ascertain  thefsex  of  the  crea*- 
ture  and  the  Rishis  have  laid  down  general  rules  for  the 
purpose  in  the  following  two  stanzas. 

8.  The  male  creatures  are  generall}^*  those  possessing 
large,  high  and  broad  shoulders,  large  neck,  fine  breast, 
short  but  deep  sound  and  uniform  gait. 


173 


IRIHAT  SAHHITA, 


[CH.  o9v 


9.  The  female  creatures  are  those  possessing  a small 
neck,  head  and  breast ; also  a small  face,  legs  and  strength  ; 
find  also,  a shrill  but  soft  sound.  Other  creatures  belong  to 
neither  sex. 

10.  In  the  present  treatise  on  omens  I shall  confine 
mj^self  to  matters  relating  to  travels.  What  are  domestic 
animals  and  what  wild  shall  be  ascertained  from  a general 
knowledge  of  creatures. 

11.  The  effects  of  omens  occurring  in  roads  affect  tlie 
traveller  and  those  of  omens  occurring  in  armies  affect  the 
king.  Omens  occurring  in  towns  affect  the  king  or  the 
village  deityj  and  omens  occurring  before  a gathering  of 
men  affect  the  leader  ; if  there  be  no  leader  and  if  the  per- 
sons be  all  of  e(|nal  rank  those  of  superior  caste,  education 
or  age  will  he  affected  by  the  omens. 

12.  Dividing  the  circle  of  horizon  into  eight  equal 
quarters  beginning  from  the  east  and  going  round,  corres- 
ponding to  the  eight  Yamas  (a  yamais  3 hours)  from  sunrise 
to  sunrise,  the  quarter  which  corresponds  to  a particular 
yama  of  the  Sun  in  his  daily  motion  is  known  as  Deepta 
(malefic).  The  quarter  next  before  it  just  quitted  by  the 
Sun  is  known  as  Angari  and  the  quarter  next  after  Deepta 
is  known  as  Dhumiui.  The  other  live  quarters  are  known 
as  Santa  (benefic)*.  The  first  three,  viz-^  the  Angari,  the 
Deepta  and  Dhnmini  quarters  relate  to  bad  events  past, 
present  and  future  respectively  according  as  the  omen 
occurs  in  such  quarters,  (a). 

13.  Omens  occurring  in  the  three  5th  (opposite)  quar 
ters  from  the  Deepta  quarters  relate  to  good  events  past, 
present  and  future.  If  the  omen  occur  in  one  of  the  re- 
maining two  quarters,  the  effects  are  good  or  bad  according 


(o>) . The  thre  t quurt^rs  at®  soaietimes  spoheu  of  as  Deepta  quarters. 


•cil-  <39.] 


EllIHA'J’  IlMHITA. 


]'79 


as  the  place  more  approaches  the  Santa  or  the  Deepta  quar- 
ter. 

14.  Effects  of  omens  occurring  in  low  places  will  b.o 

felt  soon  ; those  of  omens  occurring  in  high  places  will  be 
felt  late.  The  increase  or  the  decrease  will  follow  the 
increasing  or  the  decreasing  chaiacter  of  the  place  occupied 
by  the  omen. 

15.  If  the  hour^  the  lunar  day,  the  Nakshatra^  the 
wind  and  the  sun  be  malebc^  the  omen  is  known  as  Deiva 
Deepta  (a)  and  the  effects  will  be  of  an  increasingly  evil 
character.  If  the  gaiE  place,  sound  and  motion  of  the  omen 
as  well  as  the  membry  (of  the  Astrologer)  be  bad,  the  omen 
is  known  as  Kria  Deepta  (b)  and  the  effects  will  also  be 
of  an  increasingly  eyil  character. 

Notes. 

(a) .  That  is  if,  at  the  time  of  occurrence  of  an  omen, 
the  hour  be  that  of  a malefic  planet_,  the  lunar  day  be  a 
malefic  one,  the  Moon  pass  through  a malefic  asterism,  the 
wind  blow  hard  and  the  Sun  occupy  a malefic  quarter. 

(b) .  That  is,  if  at  the  time,  the  gait  of  the  animal  or 
bird  be  bad  or  directed  towards  bad  places,  if  the  place 
occupied  by  the  omen  be  bad,  if  the  person’s  memory  fail, 
if  the  sound  of  the  animal  or  bird  be  hoarse  and  if  it 
should  strike  its  legs  or  wings  cr  scratch  its  face  and  do 
the  like. 

16.  If  the  character  of  the  omen  be  the  opposite  of 
what  has  been  described  above,  the  omen  is  known  as  Deiva 
Santa  or  Kria  Santa  respectively.  Creatures  subsisting  on 
leaves  and  fruits  are  known  as  Soumya  (benefic);  and  those 
'Subsisting  on  flesh  and  excrement  are  known  as  Iloudra 
(malefic);  and  creatures  subsisting  on  rice  and  other  grains 
are  known  as  Sankirna  (mix^d). 


BRIHAT  SAMIHITA 


[CH.  39. 


180 

17.  Creatures  found  in  storied  houses,  temples,  palaces 
of  kings,  places  of  marriage  and  the  like,  in  beautiful  spots 
and  on  trees  where  there  may  be  honey,  juice,  milk,  fruits 
or  dowers  indicate  good  luck. 

• 

18.  If  day-cr.eatures  be  seen  to, occupy  the  tops  of 
hills  by  day,  the  effects  will  be  strong;  if  night  creatures 
be  seen  to  occupy  waters  by  night  the  effects  will  be 
strong.  The  effects  will  be  of  increasing  ’’strength  accord- 
ing as  the  creature  is  a hermaphrodite,  a female  or  a male. 

19.  Creatures  remarkable  for  speed,  genius,  strength, 
place  occupied,  merriment,  nobleness  of  mind  or  good 
sound  are  strong  when  in  their  own  places ; the  same  rule 
applies  to  useful  animals.  If  the  character  of  the  creatures 
be  otherwise  or  if  they  be  injurious  and  if  the}^  do  not 
occupy  their  own  places,  they  aro  weak. 

20.  The  cock,  the  elephant,  the  parili,  the  peacock, 
the  vanjula,  the  musk-rat,  the  duck  and  the  kutapoori  are 
strong  in  tlie  east. 

21.  The  jackal,  the  owl,  the  haritala  pigeon,  the 
crow,  the  ruddy  goose,  the  bear,  icbeumon,  the  dove,  as 
well  as  moaus,  cries  and  disagreeable  sounds  are  strong  in 
the  south. 

22.  The  ram,  the  swau,  the  osprey,  the  francoline 
partridge,  the  cat^  as  well  as  festivities,  music  and  laughter 
are  strong  in  thewes  t. 

23.  The  crane,  the  deer,  the  rat,  the  antelope,  the 
horse,  the  cuckoo,  the  blue  jay  and  the  hedgehog  as  well  as 
the  sound  of  sweet-bells  and  of  the  couch-shell  are  strong 
in  the  north, 

24.  Wild  creatures  shall  not  be  treated  as  domestic  if 
they  aro  found  in  towns,  and  domestic  creatures  shall  not  be 
treated  as  wild  if  they  ai-e  found  in  woods.  Similarly,  day- 


cu.  30.] 


BRIIIAT  SAMHITA 


ISI 


creatures  shall  not  be  confounded  with  ni«-ht  creatures  and 
vice  versa. 

25.  Creatures  afflicted  with  the  Dwandw’a  (copula- 
tion ?)  disease,  frightened  animals  and  those  that  go  about 
seeking  for  fight  or  prey  as  well  as  creatures  separated  by 
a river  and  rutting  animals  shall  not  be  treated  as  omens. 

2G.  The  fox,  the  goat,  the  ass,  the  deer,  the  camel ^ 
the  antelope  and  the  hare  shall  not  be  treated  as  omens  iu 
the  Sisira  season  (from  middle  of  January  to  middle  of 
March).  The  crow  and  the  cuckoo  shall  not  be  treated  as 
omens  in  the  Vasanta  season  .(fi’otn  middle  of  March  to  that 
of  Mav).  X 

27.  The  pig,  tlie  dog,  the  wolf  and  the  like  shall  not 
be  treated  as  omens-'in  the  month  of  Bhadrapada  (middle 
of  August  to  middle  of  September)  nor  shall  the  Abjada, 
the  cow  and  the  curlew  be  treated  as  omens  in  the  Sarab 
season  (middle  of  Sentember  to  the  middle  of  November  •) 
nor  the  elephant  and  the  Chataka  (Cuculus  Melanoleucus) 
be  treated  as  omens  iu  the  month  of  Sravana  (July — ■ 
August). 

28.  The  tiger,  the  bear,  the  monkeys,  the  leopard,  tho 
buffalo,  and  the  serpent,  as  well  as  the  young  of  animals 
other  than  human  shall  not  be  treated  os  omens  iu  the 
Hemanta  season  (from  middle  of  November  to  middle  of 
January). 

29.  The  space  between  the  eastern  and  the  south- 
eastern points  of  the  horizon  shall  be  divided  into  4 equal 
parts  by  three  points.  These  points  are  known  respec- 
tively as  those  of  Kosadhvaksha,  Analajivi  and  Tapoyukta. 

cO.  The  space  between  the  south-eastern  and  southern 
points  of  the  horizon  shall  be  divided  similarly  by  thi-eo 
points  known  respectively'  as  those  of  Silpi,  Bhikshu  and 
Yivastra  Stri  and  the  three  points  between  the  southern  and 


BlilHAT  SAMHITA 


182 


Cil.  39.] 


the  south-western  points  of  the  horizon  are  known  as  thoso 
of  Matanga,  Gopa  and  Dharmasamasraya. 

31.  The  spaoo  between  the  south-western  and  western 
points  shall  be  similarly  divided  by  three  points  known  as 
those  of  Stri,  Suti  and  Taskara;  and  the  three  points 
between  the  vvestern  and  the  north-western  points  of  the 
horizon  are  known  as  those  of  Soundikaj  Sakuui  and 
Himsra. 

o2.  The  space  between  the  north-western  and  north- 
ern points  of  the  horizon  shall  be  similarly  divided  by 
three  points  known  as  those  of  Yishaghataka^  Goswami 
and  Kuhukagna  ; and  the  three  points  between  the  north- 
ern and  north-eastern  points  of  the  horizon  are  known  as 
those  of  Dhanavan,  Eekshanaka  and  Malakara. 

33.  The  space  between  the  north-eastern  and  eastern 
points  of  the  horizon  shall  be  divided  equally  by  three 
points  known  as  those  of  Vyshnava^  Charaka  and  Yajirak- 
shaka.  These  twenty-four  points  together  with  the  eight 
points  of  the  compass  give  us  thirty-two  quarters  in  all. 

34.  The  eight  points  of  the  compass  beginning  from 
the  east  and  going  round  are  known  as  those  of  the  king 
(E),  the  first  prince  (S.E).,  the  commander  of  armies  (S), 
the  messenger  (S  W.),  the  headman  (W.)^  a spy  (N.W);  a 
brahmin  (N.),  and  an  elephant  driver  (N.E.) 

Again^  the  four  points  of  the  compass  are  known  as 
those  of  the  Kshatriyas  (E.),  the  Vysiyas  (S.),  the  Eudras 
(W.)  and  the  Brahmins  tN-} 

33.  The  omen  in  a particular  quarter  indicates  that 
the  person  who  observes  it  whether  he  be  going  or  seated 
will  soon  meet  with  the  person  presiding  over  such  quarter. 

3o.  If  the  sound  of  the  creature  be  broken,  timid, 
low,  caused  by  pain,  harsh,  feeble  or  dull,  it  indicates  evih 
The  natural  sound  of  a joyous  animal  indicates  i)rosperity. 


cm.  89.] 


rmiiiAT  samhitA 


183 


87.  The  jackal,  the  cuckoo,  the  Rala,  tho  Clinchu,  the 
icheumon,  the  lizard,  the  sow,  the  Ivokila,  arid  the  mide  of 
animals  and  birds  in  general  indicate  good  luck  when  on 
the  left  side. 

38.  The  vulture,  the  dog,  the  monkey,  the  Srikarna, 
the  musk-rat,  the  peacock,  the  Sreekantha,  the  Pippika, 
the  Rnru,  the  hawk  and  the  females  of  animals  and  birds 
indicate  good  luck  when  on  the  right  side. 

39-  Hissing  sound,  clapping  of  hands,  auspicious 
music,  and  the  sound  of  the  conch-shell  indicate  good  luck 
when  on  the  left  side.  Other  auspicious  sounds  indicate 
good  luck-  when  on  tliQ  right  side. 

40.  The  madhyama,  shadja  and  gandhara  notes 
indicate  good  luck  ; the  shadja,  madhyama,  gandhara  and 
rishbha  notes  also  indicate  good  luck. 

' Notes. — The  gandhara  note  is  found  only  in  Deva 
Loka.  The  nishada,  panchama  and  dliaivata  notes  indi- 
cate evil. 

41.  If  the  sound  of  the  sky-lark,  the  ram,  the  peacock, 
the  mungoose  and  the  king-fisher  be  beard  or  if  the  mimes 
of  these  creatures  be  heard  mentioned  or  if  the  creatures  be 
seen,  there  will  be  gain  of  wealth;  if  the  blood-sucker  be 
seen  in  front  of  a person  there  will  be  misery. 

42-  If  the  names  of  the  leech,  the  snake,  the  hare, 
the  hog  or  the  iguana  be  heard  mentioned  prosperity  is 
indicated  ; but  the  sonnd  and  the  appearance  of  these 
creatures  indicate  evil.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  names 
of  the  monkey  and  the  bear  be  heard  mentioned,  evil  is 
indicated,  while  both  the  sound  and  the  appearance  of  the 
creatures  indicate  prosperity. 

43.  If  an  odd  number  of  animals,  birds  and  the  mun- 
goose be  seen  to  move  from  left  to  right  prosperity  is  indi- 
cated and  according  to  Bhrigu  the  blue  jay  and  the  mun- 


BRIHAT  SAM  HIT  A 


]84 


CH. 


] 


goose  indicate  good  luck  if  found  to  move  from  riglit  to  left 
in  the  afternoon. 

44.  Chikkra,  Kutapuri  and  Pirili  indicate  good  luck 
if  found  to  move  from  left  to  right  by  day,  and  the  hog,  the 
iguana  and  the  snake  indicate  good  luck  if  found  to  pass 
on  tbe  riglit  side. 

45.  The  horse  and  articles  of  white  color  indicate  good 
luck  when  in  the  east ; corpse  and  flesh  indicate  good  luck 
when  in  the  south;  Virgins  and  curdled  milk  indicate  good 
luck  wdien  in  the  west ; and  the  cow,  the  Sadhus  and  the 
Brahmins  indicate  good  luck  when  seen  in  the  north. 

4G.  Persons  living  by  the  use  of  the  net  and  by  dogs 
indicate  qyiI  wlien  seen  in  the  east.  Those  who  live  by 
weapons  and  by  acts  of  torture  indicate  evil  when  seen  in 
the  south.  Liquor  and  hermaphrodites  indicate  evil  when 
seen  in  tbe  west.  And  wicked  men,  seats  and  ploughs  in- 
dicate evil  when  seen  in  the  north. 

47.  Oil  auspicious  occasions  and  on  occasions  of  the 
meeting  of  persons,  of  battle,  of  return  journey  and  of  search 
after  articles  lost,  the  omens  that  pass  in  the  reverse  order 
to  that  mentioned  for  Yatra  (journey)  generally  indicate 
good  luck.  We  shall  however  state  the  exceptions,  and  note- 
worthy points. 

48.  On  the  several  occasions  mentioned  above^  omens 
connected  with  the  deer,  the  Burn  and  the  monkey  appear- 
ing dy  day  sliall  be  treated  as  in  Yatra  and  omens  connect- 
ed with  the  blue  jay,  the  Vanjula  and  the  dog  appearing  at 
the  beginning  of  day  shall  also  be  similarly  treated. 

49.  Omens  connected  with  the  Naptrika,  the  owl  and 
the  ichenrnon  appearing  at  the  end  of  night  shall  be  treated 
in  the  same  way  as  in  Yatra.  In  matters  connected  with 
women,  omens  described  for  men  apply  in  the  rev^erse  order. 


cii.  39.] 


ERIE  AT  SAME  IT  A 


185 


50.  On  occasions  of  visits  to  the  king,  of  return-journey 
and  of  entry  into  mountains,  woods  and  rivers,  the  omens 
mentioned  for  Yatra  apply. 

51.  Omens  on  the  left  side  stated  to  be  auspicious  for 
Yatra  are  auspicious  for  other  occasions  if  they  are  found  in 
front;  and  omens  on  the  right  side  stated  to  be  auspicious 
for  Yatra  are  auspicious  for  other  occasions  if  they  are 
found  behind. 

Two  birds  flying  one  on  each  side  of  a traveller  form 
an  omen  known  as  parigha.  It  is  Kri3^adeepta  in  nature  and 
points  to  the  death  of  the  person  starting  on  a journey. 

52.  If  these  omens  be  of  gentle  sound  and  of  agreeable 
motion  they  indicate  the  gain  of  wealth  and  are  technically 

* if 

known  as  Sakunadwara. 

53.  According  to  some  the  term  Sakunadwara  is 
applied  to  omens  that  remain  on  the  right  and  left  sides,  that 
are  of  the  same  genus  and  whose  sound  and  motion  are 
agreeable. 

54.  If  an  omen  be  favorable  and  another  be  unfavora. 
ble  bad  luck  is  indicated  to  the  traveller.  He  shall  be 
guided  by  the  more  powerful  omen  of  the  two. 

55.  If  a person  starting  on  a journey  should  first  note 
an  omen  stated  to  be  auspicious  for  return  journey  and  then 
note  one  stated  to  be  auspicious  for  onward  journey  success 
of  object  is  indicated.  Similarly,  if  a person  starting  on  a 
return  journey  should  first  note  an  omen  stated  to  be  aus- 
picious for  onward  journey  and  then  note  one  stated  to  be 
auspicious  for  return  journey,  good  luck  is  indicated 

56.  If  an  omen  should  first  be  found  to  be  auspicioue 
and  if  the  same  should  then  stop  the  journey,  the  person 
who  proceeds  nevertheless  will  either  suffea  death  by  his 
enemy  or  will  engage  in  fight  or  suffer  from  disease, 

2i 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  39’. 


57.  Deepfca  (malefic)  omens  proceeding  from  left  to 
riglit  indicate  fear;  and  if  such  omens  appear  at  the  corn- 
nieucernent  of  a work  such  work  will  suffer  injury  at  the  end 
of  a year. 

58.  If  the  lunar  day,  the  wind,  the  sun,  the  Nakshatra 
the  places  and  cheshta  (motion)  be  unfavorable,  wealth, 
army,  strength,  limbs,  friends  and  business  will  suffer  respec-' 
tively. 

59.  If  the  malefic  omens  occur  when  the  clouds  roar 
there  will  be  fear  of  injury  from  strong  winds.  Malefic 
omens  occurring  during  twilight  hours  indicate  injury  from 
weapons. 

60.  If  the  creatures  be  found  in  funeral  piles,  hair  or 
skull  there  will  be  death,  imprisonment  or  suffering  froui 
torture  respectively  and  if  the  creatures  be  found  on  thorns, 
wood,  or  ashes  there  will  be  quarrel,  suffering  from  hard 
work  and  grief  respectively. 

fil.  If  malefic  omens  be  found  on  objects  hollow  and 
weak  or  on  stones,  new  fear  or  failure  of  objects  is  indica- 
ted but  if  the  omens  be  benefic  good  luck  is  indicated. 

62.  If  the  creatures  be  found  to  pass  stool  there  will 
be  failure  of  object  ; if  they  be  found  to  eat  anything,  there 
will  be  success  of  object.  Again,  if  a creature  be  seen  to 
move  away  crying  from  a person,  it  indicates  good  luck  to 
the  traveller;  but  if  it  be  found  coming  towards  him,  it  in- 
dicates that  the  person  might  return  from  his  journy. 

63.  If  the  sound  of  the  creature  be  fouud  to  be  bad, 
there  will  be  quarrel ; if  the  place  occupied  by  the  creature 
be  bad,  there  will  be  fight.  If  the  cry  of  the  creature  be 
loud  at  the  beginning  and  weak  at  the  end  there  will  be 
theft  of  property. 

61.  If  the  omen  be  bad  and  found  to  remain  crying 
in  the  same  place,  the  village  in  the  neighbourhood  will 
meet  with  ruin  after  seven  dnys,  and  the  chief  town,  the 


CRmAT  SAMHITA 


1S7 


CH.  89.] 

country  and  the  king  will  also  meet  wdtli  ruin  after  a month, 
six  months,  and  one  year  respectively. 

65.  If  the  creatures  be  those  that  eat  the  flesh  of 
their  own  kind,  other  than  snakes,  rats,  cats,  and  fish, 
there  will  be  misery. 

66.  Except  iu  .the  case  of  an  ass  and  a rnare  for  the 
generation  of  a mule  and  the  case  of  a man  and  a woman 
of  different  castes  joining  in  sexual  union_,  if  a creature  of 
one  species  be  found  to. copulate  with  a creature  of  another 
species  the  country*  will  meet  with  ruin. 

67.  If  the  creature  be  found  to  pass  near  the  feet, 
breast  or  head -of  a ^person  there  will  respectively  be  im- 
prisonment, torture  and  fear  ; if  it  be  found  to  drink  water 
there  will  be  immediate  rain  3 if  it  be  found  to  eat  grass 
there  will  betheft  ’of  property  3 if  it  be  found  to  eat  flesh 
the 'person  will  get  wounded,  and  if  it  be  found  to  eat  rice 
there  will  also  be  imprisonment. 

68.  If  the  creature  be  seen  in  any  of  the  eight  quar- 
ters  beginning  from  the  Deepta  (malefic)  quarter  and  going 
round,  there  will  respectively  be  a meeting  with  offendei  s, 
wicked  men,  ministers,  kings,  preachers  of  Puranas,  old 
men,  cruel  men  and  violent  men. 

69.  If  the  omen  be  the  approach  of  .an  object  with 
excellent  fj'uits  ar.d  the  like  there  will  be  gain  of  wealth 
and  strength.  If  the  same  object  be  found  bright,  mild 
and  with  the  eyes  turned  to  the  ground,  the  person  will  do 
wicked  deeds. 

70.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  an  inauspicious  crea- 
ture, iu  one  of  the  corners  (S.  E,  S.  W,  X*  K,  N.  W,)  recr 
procated  by  the  cry  of  a creature  on  the  left  side  of  a per- 
son thei-e  will  be  intimacy  with  a woman  of  the  class 
belonging  to  such  corner. 

71.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a creature  in  a Santa 
t(benefic)  quarter  reciprocated  by  the  cry  of  a creatur 


188 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA 


CH.  89.] 


the  Deepta  (otli  malefic)  quarter^  there  will  be  success  in 
fight  and  a meeting  with  persons  belonging  to  the  Santa 
quarter.  If  the  reverse  be  the  case  there  will  be  misery. 

72.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a creature  before  a per- 
son, reciprocated  by  the  cry  of  a creature  on  his  left  there 
will  be  fear  of  troubles  from  kinsmen  ; but  if  the  cry  of 
such  creature  be  reciprocated  by  the  cry  of  a creature  on 
the  right  side  there  will  be  fear  of  troubles  from  the  per- 
son’s enemies ; and  if  all  the  three  creatures  be  heard  to  cry 
together  there  will  be  death. 

7d.  An  omen  occurring  on  the  top  of  a tree  indicates 
the  arrival  of  an  elephant ; if  it  occur  in  the  middle  of  a 
tree^  the  arrival  of  a horse  is  indicated,  and  if  in  the  foot  of 
a tree  the  arrival  of  a chariot  is  indicated  ; if  the  cmen 
occur  in  a long  object,  the  arrival  of  human  bearers  is  in- 
dicated ; if  in  one  of  the  productions  of  water,  the  arrival  of 
a boat  is  indicated,  and  if  the  omen  occur  on  a headless  ob- 
ject, the  arrival  of  a palanquin  is  indicated. 

7i.  An  omen  occurring  in  waggons,  in  high  places, 
and  in  shadows,  indicate  the  gain  of  an  umbrella.  Omens 
occurring  in  the  east  and  S-  east,  in  the  south  and  S.  west, 
in  the  west  and  north-west  and  in  the  north  and  north-east 
tako  eflfect  after  a day,  three  days,  five  days,  and  seven  days 
respectively. 

75.  The  lords  of  tlie  eight  quarters  beginning  from 
the  east  are  respectively  Indra,  Agni  (fire),  Yama  (god  of 
death),  Niruti,  Varuna  (god  of  rain),  Yayu  (the  wind), 
Soma  (the  Moon)  and  Eesana  (Siva).  The  four  prime  quar- 
ters (E,  S,  W,  IsT.)  are  masculine  and  the  four  sub-quarters 
(S,  E.  S.  W,  N.  E)  are  feminine. 

76.  Omens  occurring  in  the  eight  quarters  beginning 
from  the  east  refer  to  wood  in  general,  the  palm,  split 
bamboo,  cloth,  productions  of  water,  arrows,  leather,  and 
shawls;  and  to  letters  of  advice  regarding  them*  Omens 


CH.  40  ] 


BRIHAT  SAM  HIT  A 


189 


occurring  in  any  of  the  thirty-two  points  of  the  horizon  in- 
dicate dealing  or  business  with  the  persons  referring  to  them. 

77.  Efiects  of  omens  appearing  in  the  eight  quarters 
beginning  from  the  east  will  occur  respectively  in  place  of 
physical  exercise,  fire^,  indistinct  sound,  quarrel,  water, 
letters,  mantras  and  cows.  The  four  prime  quarters — E.  S. 
W.  & N . — are  respectively  red,  yellow,  black  and  white,  and 
the  color  of  a sub-quarter  is  a mixture  of  the  colors  of  the 
two  adjacent  prime  quarters. 

78.  Omens  appearing  in  the  eight  quarters  beginning 

from  the  east,  take  effect  respectively  in  caves,  water,  hill, 
places  of  sacrifice  ahd  the  abodes  of  shepherds;  these  ai’e 
also  places  of  meeting,  fear,  loss  and  the  like  referred  to  in 
connection  with  several  quarters.  / 

79.  When  the  question  refers  to  women,  omens  ap- 
pearing in  the  several  quarters  beginning  from  the  East 
point  to  women  who  are  big,  young,  of  defective  organs, 
dirty,  dressed  in  black  cloth,  mean, ’[tall,  and  widowed  res- 
pectively. 

80.  The  four  prime  quarters  beginning  from  the  East 
refer  to  silver,  gold,  sick  patients  and  to  women  and  also  to 
sheep,  carriage,  sacrificial  rite  and  cow-shed.  The  eight 
quarters  beginning  from  tlie  east  refer  to  the  banyan  tree^ 
the  redTree,  the  Rodhra,  the  bamboo,  the  mango,  the  Kha- 
dira,  the  Bilva  aud  the  Arjuna  trees  respectively. 

CHAPTER  XL  (87). 

Section  II. 

On  Antaea  Chakra  or  the  circle  of  Horizon. 

1.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a creature  in  the  eastern 
quarter  (a)  when  such  quarter  is  benefic  there  will  be  a meet- 
ing with  an  officer  of  the  king  and  the  gain  of  presents, 
precious  gems,  wealth  and  excellent  articles. 

(a)  Of  33  points  iuto  wliich  the  circle  cf  horizon  is  divided.  Vide  last 
chapte  r. 


190 


ERIHAT  SAMHSTA 


Cil.  40.] 


2.  If  the  omen  bo  the  of  a creature  in  the  next 
(2nd)  benefic  quarter  there  will  be  gain  of  gold  and  of  a 
desired  object.  And  if  in  the  3rd  benefic  quarter  there  will 
be  gain  of  weapons^  of  wealth  and  of  arecanut. 

3.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a creature  in  the  4th  be- 
aefic  quarter  there  will  be  meeting  with  a pers@n  of  the 
twice  born  class  and  with  a Brahmin  w^ho  performs  the  fire 
ceremon}^  of  Agnihotra,,  and  if  in  the  5th  benefic  quarter 
(S.  E.)  there  will  be  a meeting  with  a servant  or  an  ascetic 
and  a gain  of  gold  and  metals. 

4.  If  the  omen  be  the  ci*y  of  a creature  in  the  6th  be- 
nefic quarter  there  will  be  a meeting  with  a pi  ince  and  the 
•gain  of  a desired  object,  and  if  in  the  7th  quarter  there  will 
be  the  gain  of  a woman,  of  virtue,  of  mustard  seeds,  and 
barley  grain. 

5.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a creature  in  tho  8th  bene- 
fic quarter,  there  will  be  recovery  of  property  lost  and  the 
gain  of  an  object  of  desire  by  a traveller. 

6.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a cia  ature  in  the  Cth  be- 
nefic quarter  (S),  a person  will  successfully  perform  his 
journey  and  there  will  also  be  the  gain  of’peacocks,  buffaloes 
and  pigeons.  If  in  the  lObh  benefic  quarter,  there  will  be 
a meeting  with  musicians  as  well  as  prosperity  and  joy. 

7.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a creature  in  the  llth 
benefic  quarter,  there  will  be  meeting  with  fisher  men  and 
gain  of  fish,  of  partridge  and  the  like,  and  if  in  the  12th  be- 
nefic quarter  there  will  be  meeting  v/ith  an  ascetic  and  the 
gain  of  good  meals  and  fruits. 

8.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a creature  in  tlie  I3th 
benefic  quarter  ('^.  W.)  there  will  be  a gain  of  women  and 
the  arrival  of  a horse,  ornaments,  a messenger  and  a news 
letter;  and  if  in  the  l4th  benefic  quarter,  there  will  be  a 
meeting  with  leather  work -men  and  the  gain  of  an  article 
made  of  leather. 


cir^  40.] 


BRinAT  SAMHITA 


191 


9.  If  tlie"  omou  bo  the  crv  of  a creature  in  the  15th 
benefic  quarter,  the  names  of  monkeys  and  ascetics  will  bo 
heard  mentioned  or  there  will  be  a meeting  with  these;  and 
if  the  IGtli  beuellc  quarter,  there  will  be  a gain  of  fruits, 
dowers  and  of  articles^of  ivory. 

10.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a creature  in  the  17th 
benefic  quarter  (W)  there  will  be  a gain  of  the  gems  of  the 
sea,  of  Vydur37a,  and  of  articles  set  with  gems;  and  if  in 
the  18th  henefic  quarter  thei'o  will  be  a meeting®with  hill- 
men,  hunters  and  thieves  and  the  gain  of  meals. 

11.  If  the  ornen  be  the  cry  of  a creature  in  the  19th 
benefic  quarter  there  will  be  a meeting  with  persons  afflict- 
ed with  windy  complaints  and  there  will  also  be  a gain  of 
sandal  wood  and  of  agaru;»and  if  in  the  20th  benefic 
quarter  there  will  be  a gain  of  weapons  and  books  as  well  as 
a meeting  with  persons  dealing  inithem. 

12.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a creature  in  the  21st 
benefic  quai’ter  (N,  W.)  there  will  be  a gain  of  the  bone  of 
the  white  cuttle  fish,  of  [chamara_,  and  of  woollen  shawls,  and 
there  will  also^be  a meeting  with  a person  of  the  Kayastha  [a) 
caste  or  with  a scribe;  and  if  in  the  22ud  benefic  quarter 
there  will  be  a gain  of  earthen  ware  and  a meeting  with 
conjurers  and  Dindibhaudas. 

13.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a creature  in  the  23rd 

benefic  quarter  there  will  be  a meeting  with  friends  and  the 

gain  of  wealth;  and  if  in  the  24th  benefic  quarter  there  will 
be.a  gain  of  cloths  and  horse  and  a meeting  with  a close 

o o 

friend. 

14.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a creature  in  the  25th 
benefic  quarter  (N)  there  will  be  a gain  of  curdled  milk,  rice 
and  fried  grain  and  a meeting  with  Brahmins  ; and  if  in  the 

o o 


( a).  A persou  horn  of  a Ksliatriya  father  and  a Sudra  mother. 


BEIIIAT  SAMHITA 


102 


CH.  40-] 


26tli  benefic  quarter  there  will  be  a praiu  of  wealth  and  a 
meeting  with  the  chief  of  a party  of  men. 

15.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a creature  in  the  27th 

benefic  quarter  there  will  be  a meeting'  with  a prostitute, 
a Brahma  chari  and  a servant  and  there  will  also  be  the 
gain  of  dried  fruits  and  flowers  ; and  if  in  the  28th  benefic 
quarter,  there  will  be  a meeting  with  a painter  and  a gain 
of  cloths. 

16.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a creature  in  the  29th 
benefic  quarter  (H.  E.)  there  will  be  a meeting  with  an  idol- 
worshipper  and  a gain  of  grain,  gems  and  cows  ; and  if  in 
the  30th  benefic  quarter  there  will  be  a gain  of  cloth  and  a 
meeting  with  a prostitute. 

17.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a crenture  in  the  31st 
benefic  quarter  there  will  be  a meeting  with  a washerman 
and  the  gain  of  the  productioi^s  of  water ; and  if  in  thg 
32nd  benefic  quarter  there  will  be  a meeting  with  an  ele- 
phant-driver and  the  gain  of  wealth  and  elephants. 

18.  The  division  of  the  circle  of  horizon  into  32  equal 
parts  was  also  mentioned  in  connection  with  house-building. 
The  eight  spokes  (radii)  and  the  centre  form  nine  more 
places  where  omens  indicate  various  effects. 

39.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a creature  in  the  centre 
there  will  be  a meeting  with  kinsmen  and  friends  and  sexual 
union  with  au  excellent  woman  ; if  it  be  the  cry'"of  a crea- 
ture  in  the  eastern  spoke,  there  will  be  a meeting  with  a. 
king  and  the  gain  of  red  silk  cloths. 

20.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a creature  in  the  S*  E, 
spoke,  there  will  be  a meeting!  with  a weaver,  a carpenter 
a sculptor  and  a horse  driver  and  there  will  alsoibe  a gain 
of  wealth  through  them  or  the  gain  of  horses. 

21.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a creature  in  the 
southern  spoke^,  there  will  be  a meeting  with  virtuous  per- 
sons and  the  gain  of  virtue. 


CH.  40.] 


BRinAT  SAMIIITA 


193 


22.  If  the  omen  be  tbe  cry  of  a creature  in  the 
Boutb-western  spoke,  there  will  bo  a meetiug  with  a cow, 
a player  and  a Kapalika,  and  there  will  also  be  the  gain  of 
a bull,  black  gram,  horse-gram  and  the  like  and  meals. 

23.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a creature  in  the  west- 
ern spoke,  there  will  be  a meeting  with  husbandmen  and 
the  gain  of  the  productions  of  the  sea,  of  crystal,  of  fruits 
and  of  liquor. 

24.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a creature  in  the  north- 
western spoke,  there  will  be  a meeting  with  a porter,  a car- 
penter, and  an  ascetic  and  there  will  also  be  the  gain  of  the 
flowers  of  the  Tilaka,  the  piper-betel  and  of  the  Punnaga. 

25.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a creature  in  the  north- 
ern spoke,  there  will  be  gain  of  wealth  and  there  will  also 
be  a meeting  with  a devout  person  and  with  a person  dress- 
ed in  yellow  robes. 

2b.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a creature  in  the  north- 
eastern spoke,  there  will  be  a meeting  with  a female  devotee 
and  the  gain  of  iron,  cloths  and  bells. 

27.  Omens  occurriug  in  the  eight  quarters  on  the 
South,  in  the  2nd,  6th,  3rd,  7th,  and  8th  quarters  on  the 
West  and  in  the  2nd  quarter  on  the  North  are  not  favorable 
for  journey.  Omens  occurring  in  the  other  quarters  are 
auspicious  for  the  purpose. 

28.  Inside  the  circle,  omens  appearing  in  the  south- 
western and  north-western  spokes  are  not  favorable  for 
journey;  and  those  appearing  in  the  other  spokes  and  in  the 
centre  are  auspicious  for  the  purpose. 

29.  We  have  till  now  been  describing  the  effects  of 
omens  in  the  several  quarters  when  they  happen  to  be  bene- 
ficand  we  shall  now  proceed  to  describe  the  effects  of  omens 
in  the  same  quarters  when  they  are  malefic.  If  the  omen 

25 


RRIHAT  SAMHITA- 


194 


[oh.  40. 


occur  due  East,  there  will  be  fear  from  the  king  and  a meet- 
ing with  the  enemy. 

30.  If  the  omen  occur  in  the  2nd  malefic  quarter 
there  will  be  injury  to  gold  and  suffering  to  goldsmiths  ; if 
in]  the^^Srd  [malefic  quarter  there  will  be  loss  of  wealth, 
quarrel  and  fight. 

81.  If  the  omen  occur  in  the  4th  malefic  quarter  there 
will  be  fear  of  iujury  from  fire;  if  it  occur  due  S.  E,  there 
will  be  fear  from  robbers,  and  if  in  the  6th  malefic  quarter 
there  will  be  loss  of  wealth  and  the  death  of  princes. 

32.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a creature  in  the  7tli 
malefic  quarter,  there  will  be  miscarriage  of  pregnancy,  and 
if  in  the  8th  malefic  quarter  there  will  be  the  death  of 
dealers  in  gold  and  of  sculptors  as  well  as  fight. 

33.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a creature  due  South, 
there  will  be  fear  from  the  king  and  death  by  plague;  if 
in  the  lObh  malefic  quarter,  the  Dombas  (wandering  tribe) 
will  suffer  miseries. 

34.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a creature  in  the  11  th 
malefic  quarter,  fishermen  and  fowlers  will  suffer,  and  if  in 
the  12th  malefic  quarter,  there  will  be  injury  to  meals  and 
ascetics  will  suffer. 

35.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a creature  due  south- 
west, there  will  be  quarrel,  bloodshed  and  fight,  and  if  in 
the  14th  malefic  quarter,  there  will  be  injury  to  articles  of 
leather  and  workmen  in  leather  will  suffer  miseries. 

36.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a creature  in  the  15th 
malefic  quarter,  ascetics  will  suffer  miseries  and  the  sense  of 
hearing  will  suffer  injury;  if  in  the  16th  malefic  quarter, 
there  will  be  suffering  from  hunger  ; if  due  west,  there  will 
be  suffering  from  heavy  rains  and  if  in  the  18th  meilefic 
quarter,  dogs  and  thieves  will  suffer  miseries. 


CH.  40.] 


BRiniT  SAMHITA. 


195 


87.  If  tliQ  omen  be  the  cry  of  a creature  in  the  19ih 
malefic  quarter  there  will  be  injury  from  violent  winds  ; if 
in  the  20th  malefic  quarter,  dealers  in  books  and  weapons 
will  suffer  ; if  due  north-west,  books  will  suffer  injuries  and 
if  in  the  next  (22nd)  malefic  quarter  there  will  be  fear  from 
poison,  thieves  and  wind. 

38.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a creature  in  the  23rd 
malefic  quarter,  there  will  be  destructjon  of  wealth  and  a 
quarrel  with  friends  ; if  in  the  24th  malefic  quarter,  horses 
will  be  killed  and  priests  will  suffer. 

89.  If  the  omen  occur  due  North,  there  will  be  theft 
of  cows  and  blow^  from  weapons  ; if  in  the  26th  malefic 
quarter,  parties  of  men  will  suffer  and  there  will  be  des- 
truction of  wealth  I if  in  the  27th  malefic  quarter,  there 
-will  be  fear  of  injury  from  dogs  and  out-castes,  servants 
and  prostitutes  will  suffer  miseries. 

4 0.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a creature  in  the  28tli 
malefic  quarter,  cloths  of  various  colors  will  suffer  as  well 
as  painters  j if  it  occur  due  north-east,  there  will  bo  fear  of 
injury  from  fire  and  virtuous  women  will  suffer  from 
calumny. 

41.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a creature  in  the  next 
(30th)  malefic  quarter  there  will  be  grief  and  the  death  of 
women  j if  in  the  81st  malefic  quarter,  washermen  and 
persons  dwelling  on  the  banks  of  rivers  will  suffer  miseries. 

42.  If  the  omen  be  [the  cry  of  a creature  in  the  last 
(32nd)  malefic  quarter,  elephant-drivers  will  suffer  miseries 
as  well  as  elephants.  Again,  if  the  omen  occur  in  the 
eastern  malefic  spoke  (within  the  circle)  a person  will  lose 
his  wife. 

43.  If  the  omen  occur  in  the  south-eastern  malefic 
spoke,  there  will  be  fight  and  injury  from  fire  and  the 
death  of  horses,  and  sculptors  will  suffer.  If  it  occur  in  the 


19G 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  41 

fiouthera  malefic  spoke,  there  will  be  destruction  of  works, 
of  charity,  and  if  in  the  south-western  malefic  spoke,  there 
will  be  fear  of  injury  from  fire  and  parties  of  men  will  be 
killed. 

44.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a creature  in  the  west- 
ern malefic  spoke,  servants  will  suffer  ; if  in  the  north- 
western malefic  spoke,  asses  and  camels  will  he  killed  and 
mankind  will  suffer  from  cholera  and  poison. 

45.  If  the  omen  occur  in  the  northern  malefic  spoke, 
there  will  be  destruction  of  wealth  5 and  if  in  the  north- 
eastern malefic  spoke,  the  creatures  of  the  village  and 
shepherds  will  suffer,  and  if  it  occur  in  the  malefic  centre, 
the  person  himself  will  suffer  troubles. 


Ill 

CHAPTER  XLL  ^88). 

On  Ominous  Cries. 

1.  The  Kokila  or  the  Indian  Cuckoo,  the  hog,  the 
Sasaghria,theYanjula,tho  peacock,  the  fireekarna,^the  Brah- 
mani  duck,  the  blue-jay,  the  Andiraka,  the  wag-tail,  the 
parrot,  the  crow,  the  dove,  the  sky-lark,  the  wild-cock,  the 
the  osprey,  the  Haritaia  pigeon  the  vulture,  the  monkey, 
the  Phenta,  the  cock,  the  Poornakoota  and  the  sparrow  are 
day  birds  and  animals. 

2,  The  Jackal,  the  Pingala,  the  Chippika,  the  flying 
fox,  the  owl  and  the  hare  are  night  birds  and  animals.  If 
the  day  birds  be  found  to  move  at  night  or  if  the  night 
birds  be  found  to  move  by  day,  either  the  country  will 
suffer  or  the  king  will  meet  with  ruin. 

8.  Horses,  men,  serpents,  camels,  leopards,  lions, 
bears,  iguanas,  wolves,  the  mungoose,  the  deer,  the  dog,  the 
goat,  the  COW;  the  tiger,  the  swan;  the  spotted  antelope, 


CH.  41.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA 


107 


the  stag,,  the  jaohal,  the  hedge-hog,  the  cuckoo,  the  cat,  tho 
Indian  crane  and  the  pigeon  are  both  day  and  night  animals. 

4.  The  Bhasha,  the  Kootapura,  the  Karabaka  and  tho 
Karayika  are  birds  of  the  species  known  as  Poornakoota. 
The  Pingalika,  the  Pechika  and  the  Hakka  are  owls  of  tho 
species  known  as  Ulukacheti. 

5.  The  Kapotaki  and  the  S3^ama  are  doves  of  tho 
same  class.  The  Yanjulaka  and  the  Kliadirachanchu  are 
fowls  of  the  same  class.  The  Chachhuudari  and  the  Nripa- 
Buta  are  rats  of  the  same  class.  The  Baleya  and  tho 
Gardhabha  are  asses  of  the  same  class. 

6.  Srotobheri, ‘Tatakabheri  and  Ekapntraka  are  birds 
of  the  same  class.  The  Kalahakarika,  and  the  Pala  are  also 
birds  of  the  same  class.  The  Rala  is  a bird  two  inches  high 
and  sounds  like  a Bhringara  (a  golden  pitcher?)  at  night. 

7.  The  Burbalaka  and  the  Bhandika  are  birds  of  one 
species.  If  these  birds  be  found  to  pass  on  the  right  side, 
they  indicate  good  luck  to  the  people  of  the  Eastern 
countries.  Ghikkara  is  a species  of  animal  and  Krakavaku 
and  Kukuta  are  fowls  of  the  same  species* 

8.  Girfcakukuta  is  also  known  as  Kulalakukuta  and 
Kudyamatsya  (the  wall-fish)  and  Grahagodhika  are  different 
names  for  the  houso  lizard, 

9.  Divya  and  Dhanvana  are  animals  of  the  samo 
species;  Kroda  and  Sukara  are  different  names  for  the  hog  ; 
Go  and  Usra  are  different  names  for  the  cow  and  Swa  and 
Sarameya  are  dogs  of  the  same  species. 

10.  Thus  birds  and  animals  bear  different  names  in 
different  countries.  The  animals  shall  first  be  identified 
from  their  names  and  their  cries  shall  then  be  interpreted 
as  stated  below. 

11.  If  the  Yanjala  bird  be  heard  to  sound  as  Tittidy 
such  sound  is  inauspicious  J but  if  it  be  heard  to  sound  as 


193 


BEIHAT  SAMHm 


{cH.  4L 


KilJcili  tlie  sound  is  auspicious.  The  other  than  natural 
sounds  of  the  hawk,  the  parrot,  the  vulture  and  the  crow 
are  inauspicious. 

12  If  the  dove  be  seen  to  conceal  itself  in  a carriaofO 
or  a seat  or  a bed  or  enter  a lotus  flower,  it  indicates  evil. 
The  effects  are  felt  after  different  periods  in  the  case  of 
different  species  of  this  bird  : — » 

13.  If  the  dove  be  wholly  white,  the  effects  will  be 
felt  after  a year;  if  it  be  of  various  colors,  the  effects  will  be 
felt  after  6 months  and  if  of  crimson  color  with  a slight  ad- 
mixture of  black,  the  effects  will  be  felt  that  same  day. 

14.  If  the  cuckoo  be  heard  to  sound  as  cJiichit^  it  indi- 
cates good  luck;  if  as  sulisul,  there  will  be  gain  of  wealth ; 
if  as  ChacliTia,  it  indicates  evil  and  if  as  chihchik  there  will 
be  gain  of  a desired  object. 

15.  If  the  Haritala  pigeon  be  heard  to  sonud  as  gugu 
there  will  be  prosperity  ; if  in  any  other  way,  it  indicates  evil. 
The  sound  of  the  sky-lark  always  indicates  prosperity. 

16.  If  the  female  crane  be  heard  to  sound  as  Idsh-lcish 
or  as  haJia-lcahcc  there  will  be  prosperity  J but  if  the  sound 
be  hara-karcij  there  will  also  be  prosperity  biit  without  gain 
of  wealth. 

17.  If  the  same  bird  be  heard  to  sound  as  kutuJcIi^ 
there  will  be  prosperity  ; if  as  Katiihli,  there  will  be  rain  ; 
but  if  the  sound  of  the  bird  be  as  hotihU  or  as  gum  there 
will  be  evil. 

18.  If  the  Divyaka  be  seen  on  the  left  side,  there  will 
be  prosperity.  If  it  be  seen  a cubit  above  the  ground  there 
will  be  gain  of  a desired  object  and  if  it  be  seen  above  the 
height  of  a man,  the  person  will  become  master  of  the 
whole  country  surrounded  by  the  sea. 

19.  If  the  cobra  be  seen  to  move  towards  a traveller 
there  will  be  a meeting  with  the  enemy,  imprisonment, 


CH.  41.] 


BRIHAT  BAMHITA. 


199 


alauglifcer  and  ruin  ; if  it  be  seen  to  move  on  the  left  side, 
tliere  Avill  be  failure  of  a work  attempted  but  safe  journey 
to  and  fro. 

20.  If  the  wag-tail  be  seen  on  a lotus  or  on  the  heads  of 
horses,  elephants  or  snakes  there  will  be  gain  of  a kingdom  ; 
if  seen  in  pure  places  and  on  meadows,  there  will  be  pros- 
perity and  if  seen  on  ashes,  bones,  wood,  husk,  hair  or 
grass,  there  will  be  grief  for  a year. 

21.  If  the  francoline  partridge  bo  heard  to  sound  Icili 
Tiilldli  there  will  be*  prosperity  and  not  otherwise  j if  at 
night  the  hare  be  seen  to  go  crying  on  the  left  side  there 
■will  be  good  luck,  t 

22.  If  the  monkey  be  heard  to  cry  as  hilikili  the 
traveller  will  not  meet  with  success.  According  to  some, 
if  the  wild  cock  be  heard  to  cry  as  cliughi  or  like  a monkey 
the  traveller  will  meet  with  success. 

23.  If  the  blue-jay  be  seen  to  move  to  the  right  of  a 
person  with  worms,  insects  or  bone  in  its  mouth  or  to  fly 
round  in  the  sky,  the  traveller  will  soon  gain  wealth. 

24.  If  the  crow  and  the  blue-jay  be  seen  to  pass  to 
the  right  fighting,  the  jay  suffering  defeat,  the  traveller  will 
be  killed  and  if  the  reverse  be  the  case,  there  will  be  suc- 
cess. 

25.  If  the  blue-jay  be  heard  to  sound  as  keka  like  the 
Poornakuta  on  the  left  side,  there  will  be  success  3 but  if 
krakra  be  the  cry,  it  indicates  evil ; but  the  appearance  of 
the  blue-jay  always  indicates  success  to  the  traveller. 

26.  If  the  Undirabe  heard  to  sound  as  tee,  it  indicates 
good  luck  and  if  the  cry  be  tittittee,  it  indicates  evil.  If  the 
Phenta  bo  seen  on  the  right  side,  it  indicates  good  luck. 
The  sound  of  this  bird  signifies  neither  good  nor  evil. 

27.  If  the  Sreekarna  be  heard  to  sound  as  quaqua  on 
the  left  side;  it  indicates  good  luck  j but  if  tbo  cry  be  chik- 


200  BRIHAT  SAMHITA,  [CH.  41* 

cliih  the  effects  will  be  indifferent ; if  otherwise,  the  sound 
signifies  nothing. 

28.  If  the  Durbali  be  heard  to  sound  as  chiril-mrilv 
on  the  left  side,  there  will  be  the  gain  of  a desired  object 
and  if  it  be  seen  to  move  from  left  to  right,  there  will  be 
immediate  success  of  work. 

29.  If  the  Durbali  be  seen  to  move  from  left  to  right 
crying  chih-chihi  there  will  be  prosperity  but  not  success  of 
work ; if  it  be  seen  to  pass  from  right  to  left,  there  will  be 
slaughter,  imprisonment  and  fear. 

30.  If  the  Sarika  be  heard  to  sound  Krakra  or  fear- 
lessly as  trey-trey j the  traveller  will  soon  get  wounded  and 
there  will  be  much  shedding  of  blood. 

31.  If  the  Phentaka  be  heard  to  cry  as  chiril-virilv  on 
the  left  side,  there  will  be  prosperity ; if  the  sound  be 
otherwise  there  will  be  evil. 

82.  If  the  cry  of  the  ass  be  long  and  on  the  left  side^ 
it  indicates  good  luck.  If  the  sound  be  Om,  a person  proceed- 
ing on  a journey  will  meet  with  success  ; otherwise,  the  cry 
is  malefic. 

83.  If  stag  and  the  deer  be  heard  to  sound  as  Aa  and 
if  the  spotted  antelope  be  heard  to  sound  as  0 there  will 
be  good  luck  ,*  if  otherwise  there  will  be  misery. 

84*  The  cock  crows  as  Kuku  except  when  it  sounds 
fearfully  at  night  and  also  when  ill  j the  long  natural  and 
high  sound  heard  in  the  morning  indicates  prosperity  to 
the  country,  the  town  and  the  king. 

35.  The  Ohippika  sounds  in  various  ways.  The  KuIiL’> 
kulib  sound  is  auspicious,-  other  sounds  are  inauspicious. 
The  sound  of  the  cat  is  always  auspicious  to  a traveller  ; 
if  the  cow  be  seen  to  sneeze,  it  indicates  the  death  of  the 
person  proceeding  on  a journey. 


cn.  41.] 


BRIIIAT  SAMIIITA. 


COl 

36.  The  owl  is  often  seen  after  its  mate  setting 

■up  the  jo3"Ous  cry  of  humhuni  or  gugliik-  The  sound  is  heneQc 
If  the  sound  he  guralii  or  hiskisi.  it  is  always  malefic.  If 
the  owl  be  seen  to  sound  frequentl}^  as  halabalai  there  will 
be  quarrel  > but  if  the  sound  be  iatattataj  there  will  be  misery" 
All  other  sounds  are  malefic  and  do  not  indicate  gool  luck. 

37.  If  the  crane  with  its  mate  be  heard  to  sound  to- 
gether, it  indicates  good  luck.  But  if  one  of  them  ho  heard 
to  sound  alone  or  if  they  be  heard  to  sound  one  after  the 
other,  such  sound  is  not  auspicious. 

38.  If  the  Pingala  be  heard  to  sound  as  chirilvirilv 
good  luck  is  indicated.  Any  other  sound  is  inauspicious. 

39.  If  the  Pingala  he  heard  to  sound  as  Isee  it  stops 
the  journey.  If  it  be  heard  to  sound  as  kus'iikusu,  there  will 
be  quarrel.  I shall  now  state  what  has  to  be  done  to  make 
this  bird  foretell  future  events. 

40.  The  tree  in  which  the  bird  Pingala  may  happen 
to  dwell  shall  be  visited  by  a person  Avho  has  bathed  either 
in  the  evening  or  in  the  twilight  hours ; the  person  shall 
first  worship  Brahma  and  the  other  Devas.  He  shall  then 
adorn  the  tree  with  a fine  new  cloth  and  with  Sandal  paste. 

41.  At  mid-night  the  person  shall  take  his  station 
alone  to  the  north-east  of  the  tree  and  pronouncing  the 
mantras  given  below  within  its  hearing  call  upon  the  bird 
to  divine  his  thoughts  and  indicate  the  issue;  he  shall 
solemnly  call  u|X)n  the  bird  to  do  so  in  the  name  of  every’' 
thing  holy  excepting  the  names  of  the  Devas. 

42.  O thou  giver  of  prosperity,  I entreat  thee  to 
divine  my  thoughts;  thou  art  praised  as  knowing  all  langua- 
ges.” 

43.  I mean  to  leave  only  after  being  informed  b}r 
thee  and  I will  question  thee  from  the  noth-eastern  corner 
ear!}^  in  the  morning.” 


20 


ERIHAT  SAMHITA 


CH.  42.] 


202 

44.  0 thou  giver  of  prosperity,  I call  upon  thee  to 
indicate  by  signs^  the  issue  of  the  object  I have  in  view.’’ 

45.  If  immediately  after  this,  the  bird  be  heard  to 
sound  the  cJiiril-virilv  there  will  be  success  of  the  under- 
taking, but  if  the  sound  be  either  dis  or  kucJia-hucha  there 
will  be  much  mental  sfFering. 

49.  If  the  bird  be  mute, then  also,  there  will  be  success* 
The  effects  described  for  the  numerous  points  of  the  Circle 
of  Horizon  apply  hero  also;  and  if  the  bird  be  seated  in  the 
top-Most  branches,  the  effects  will  fully  come  to  pass ; if  in 
the  middle  branches,  one-half  of  the  effects  will  alone  come 
to  pass  and  if  in  the  lower  branches  very  little  of  the  effects 
will  come  to  pass.  ^ 

47.  All  that  has  been  said  for  the  thirty-two  points  of 
the  outer-circle,  the  eight  spoke  lines  and  the  centre  apply 
to  the  sound  of  the  house-lizard  in  these  positions.  Again, 
if  the  blind  mouse  be  heard  to  sound  as  chicchid,  the  sound 
is  malefic,  but  if  the  sound  he  tittid  it  is  benefic  and  indicates 
good  luck, 

CHAPTER  XLII  (89). 

IV. 

On  Omens  connected  with  the  Dog. 

1.  (a).  If  the  dog  be  seen  to  pass  urine  on  a man,  a 
horse,  an  elephant,  a pot,  a saddle,  on  milk  trees,  on  heaps 
of  unburnt  brick,  on  an  umbrella,  a bed,  a seat,  a wooden 
mortar,  on  a banner,  a chamara  or  ground  covered  Avith 
tender  grass  or  flowers  and  to  go  before  the  traveller,  it 
indicates  success;  if  it  be  seen  to  pass  urine  on  wet  cow-dung^ 
the  person  will  get  good  meals,  and  if  on  dry  cow-dung  he 
will  get  miserable  meals  or  sugar  and  cakes. 

(h)  Agin,  if  the  dog  be  seen  to  pass  urine  on  poisonous 
trees,  on  thorny  trees,  dry-wood,  stones,  dried  trees,  bones,  or 
cremation  ground  and  to  scratch  over  the  parts  and  to  go 


cn.  42  ] 


BRf^AT  SAMHITA 


203 


before  the  traveller,  if  indicates  evil;  if  it  be  seen  to  pass 
urine  on  a bed  or  on  the  unused  vessels  of  a pot-man  and 
tlie  like  it  indicates  disgrace  to  virgins ; if  it  be  seen  to  pass 

urine  on  used  vessels  or  on  shoes,  it  indicates  disgrace 
to  the  traveller’s  wife  and  if  it  be  seen  to  pass  urine  on  a 
cow,  there  will  be  a mingling  of  castes, 

(c).  Again,  if  the  dog  be  seen  to  approach  the  traveller 
with  a slip})er  in  its  mouth,  the  traveller  will  gain  his  object  ; 
if  it  be  seen  with  its  mouth  full  of  flesh,  there  will  be  a gain 
of  wealth  ; if  with  a raw  bone  in  its  mouth,  there  will  be 
good  luck;  if  it  be  seen  to  approach  with  a burning  torch 
or  a dry  bone  in  its  mouth,  there  will  be  death;  if  with  a 
dead  torch,  the  person  will  receive  blows  ; if  it  be  seen  to 
approach  dragging " with  it  the  head,  hands,  feet,  face  or 
other  limbs  of  a person,  there  wdll  be  gain  of  lands;  and  if 
it  be  seen  to  approach  with  a cloth,  the  bark  of  a tree  and 
the  like,  there  will  be  danger.  According  to  some,  if  a 
dog  be  seen  to  approach  with  a cloth  in  its  mouth,  there 
will  be  good  luck. 

(cZ).  Also,  if  the  dog  be  seen  to  enter  the  house  with 
a dry-bone  in  its  month,  the  head  of  the  family  will  die. 
If  it  be  seen  to  enter  with  fetters,  creepers,  leather-straps, 
ropes  and  the  like,  he  will  suffer  imprisonment.  If  it  be 
seen  to  shake  its  ears,  to  get  on  the  person  of  the  traveller 
and  to  lick  his  feet,  he  will  meet  with  obstacles*.  If  it  be 
seen  to  stop  the  traveller,  he  will  suffer  attack.  If  it  be 
seen  to  scratch  the  body,  he  will  meet  with  opposition  and 
if  the  dog  be  seen  to  lie  with  its  head  raised  up,  there  will 
be  evil. 

2.  If  one  or  more  dogs  he  seen  to  bark  at  the  Sun 
from  the  middle  of  a village,  there  will  be  a change  of 
ulcrs. 


204 


BRIHAT  ?AMniTA 


CH.  42.] 


3.  If  the  dog  be  seen  to  bark  st  the  San  in  the  mor- 
ning from  the  South-east  quarter  there  'will  be  immediate 
fear  from  destructive  fire  and  from  robbers ; if  it  be  seen  to 
do  so  at  noon,  there  will  be  death  from  fire  and  if  in  the 
evening,  there  will  be  fight  and  bloodshed. 

4.  If  the  dog  be  seen  to  bark  at  the  Sun  towards  sun- 
set, farmers  will  soon  suffer.  If  it  be  seen  to  bark  turning 
to  the  Northwest  within  six  ghatikas  after  sunset,  there  will 
be  suffering  from  winds  and  robbers, 

5.  If  the  dog  be  seen  to  bark  at  mid -night  turning  to 
the  North,  Brahmins  will  suffer  and  cows  will  be  carried 
away  by  robbers : and  if  it  be  seen  to  bark  at  dawn  of  day 
turning  to  north-east,  virgins  will  suffer  from  disgrace, 
there  will  be  fear  from  destructive  fire  and  a miscarriage 
of  pregnancy. 

6.  If,  in  the  rainy  season,  the  dog  be  seen  to  bark 
aloud  from  a heap  of  rubbish,  from  tho  king’s  palace,  the 
temple  or  the  top  of^a  house,  there  will  be  abundent  rain ; and 
if  it  be  seen  to  do  so  in  any  other  season  there  will  be  death, 
fear  from  destructive  fires  and  suffering  from  diseases. 

7.  If,  in  the  rainy  seasom  when  there  is  no  rain,  the 
dog  be  seen  to  plunge  frequently  into  water  or  to  drink  it 
or  to  shake  it  off  from  its  sides,  there  will  be  rain  within 
12  days. 

8.  If  the  dog  be  Been  to  bark  at  the  mistress  of  the 
house  with  its  head  on  the  tbresh-hold  while  its  body  re- 
mains without,  the  master  of  tho  house  will  suffer  from 
disease  ; buf  if  it  be  seen  to  do  so  with  its  body  within  the 
gate  and  its  head  without  it,  tho  mistress  of  the  house  will 
suffer  disgrace. 

9.  If  the  dog  be  seen  to  scratch  the  walls  of  the  bouse 
there  will  be  house-breaking  by  robbers  ; if  it  be  seen  to 
dig  the  ground  in  the  cow-shed,  cows  will  be  robbed  away 


CH.  42. J 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA 


205 


and  if  it  be  seen  to  scratch  the  places  where  grain  is  stored 
up,  there  will  be  gain  of  grain. 

10.  If  the  dog  be  seen,  to  eat  something  miserablo 

with  a weeping  eye  and  a pitiable  look,  the  master  of  the 

house  will  suffer  grief;  and  if  it  be  seen  to  play  with  cows 

there  will  be  plenty,  prosperity,  health  and  joy. 

• 

11.  If  the  dog  be  seen  to  kiss  or  smell  the  left  knee, 
there  will  be  gain  of  wealth  ; if  it  be  seen  to  kiss  the 
light  knee,  there  will  be  quarrel  with  women  ; if  it  be  seen 
to  kiss  the  left  thigh,  there  will  be  sensual  enjo3^ment  and 
if  it  be  seen  to  kiss  the  right  thigh  there  will  be  enmity 
between  friends. 

12.  If  the  dog  be  seen  to  kiss  the  feet,  the  traveller 
will  be  stopped  in  his  journey  ; but  a person  who  does  not 
travel  will  gain  the  object  of  bis  desire.  If  the  dog  be  seen 
to  kiss  the  shoes  of  a person,  that  person  will  soon  begin 
to  travel. 

13.  If  the  dog  be  seen  to  kiss  both  the  arms,  there 
will  be  suffering  from  enemies  and  robbers  and  if  it  be  seen 
to  conceal  in  a heap  of  rubbish,  flesh,  bones,  or  any  eatables, 
there  will  be  immediate  fear  from  destructive  fires. 

14.  If  the  dog  be  seen  to  bark  first  in  the  village  and 
then  in  the  village  cremation  ground,  the  chief  person  of 
the  village  will  die  and  if  it  be  seen  to  bark  towards  a tra- 
veller, it  stops  his  journey. 

1*^.  If  the  dog  be  seen  to  bowl  with  the  sound  of  the 
letter  Oo  on  tho  left  side  there  will  be  gain  of  wealth;  if 
with  the  sound  of  the  long  vovel  0 on  the  left  side,  there 
will  also  be  gain  of  wealth  ; if  with  the  sound  of  the  letter  aw. 
on  the  left  side,  there  will  bo  ridicule  ; and  if  it  be  seen  to 
bowl  in  any  sound  from  behind;  the  travUer  will  meet  with 
obstacles. 


206 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  43* 


IG.  If  dogs  be  seen  to  cry  frequently  uttering  the 
sound  ShanhJicc  as  if  beaten  with  a stick  or  if  they  be  seen 
to  ruu  in  a curve^  the  ruin  of  the  village  is  indicated  and 
there  will  also  be  deaths. 

17.  If  the  dog  be  seen  to  show  its  teeth,,  and  lick  its 
mouth-corners  there  will  be  good  meals  ; if  it  be  found  to 
liok  its  mouth,  there  will  be  obstacle  even  though  good 
meals  may  be  witlun  reach. 

18.  If  dogs  bo  frequently  seen  to  crowd  and  bark  to- 
gether in  the  middle  of  towns  and  villages,  tho  head-man 
will  suffer  miseries;  a wild  dog  shall  be  treated  simply  as 
a wild  beast. 

19.  If  dogs  be  seen  to  bark  near  trees  there  will  be 
rain ; if  they  bark  near  Indra’s  banner,  the  minister  will 
suffer  ; if  they  bark  in  the  middle  of  the  house,  the  master 
of  the  house  will  suffer  from  windy  complaint  and  if  they 
be  seen  to  bark  from  the  gates  of  towns,  the  towns  will 
suffer. 

20.  If  the  dog  he  seen  to  bark  from  a bed,  the  master 
of  the  bed  will  suffer  miseries  in  his  travel ; if  it  be  seen 
to  cry  from  behind,  there  will  be  fear  and  if  it  be  seen  to 
go  round  men  from  left  to  right  and  then  bark,  there  will 
be  trouble  from  enemies. 

CHAPTER  XLIII.  (90.) 

Y. 

On  Tjie  Cry  op  The  Jackal.  . •.  . ; 

• 

1.  All  tliat  has  been  said  of  the  dog  applies  also  to 
the  Jackal.  There  are  however  a few  special  points  to  be 
noticed.  The  jackal  becomes  ruttisb  in  the  Sisira  season 
(from  middle  of  January  to. that  of  March)  when  its  acts 
signify  nothing.  If  the  jackal  be  seen  to  cry  hoo-hoo  first 
and  ta^ta  nest,  the  cry  is  benefic^  All  other  cries _ are 
malefic. 


cn.  43.] 


BRTIIAT  SAMHITA 


207 


2*  Kakka  is  the  natural  cry  of  the  jackal  known  as 
Lomasika ; it  indicates  good  luck.  All  other  cries  iudi- 
cate  evil. 

3.  The  cry  of  the  jackal  in  the  east  and  in  the  north 
indicates  good  luck;  if  the  cry  be  towards  a Santa  (benetic) 
quarter  the  person  will  be  respected  everywhere.  If  the 
cry  be  towards  the  Dlinmita  quarter  and  be  malefic  in  its 
nature,  the  lords  of  siich  quarter  will  suffer  miseries. 

4.  In  whatsoever  quarter  the  Jackal  may  be,  if  its 
cry  be  towards  a Deepta  (malefic)  quarter,  there  will  be 
prosperity.  The  cry  at  noon  indicates  great  evil ; the  ciy 
of  the  jackal  in  the ‘South  and  towards  the  Sun  indicates 
misery  to  the  town  and  army. 

5.  If  Yalii  be  the  cry  of  the  jackal  there  will  be  injuiy 
from  fire.  If  tata  be  the  cry,  there  will  be  death.  If  Dlilh 
— Dliik  be  the  cry,  wicked  deeds  will  be  committed  ; if  the 
cry  be  that  of  the  jackal  with  a flaming  mouth,  the  country 
will  meet  with  ruin. 

6.  According  to  some,  the  cry  of  the  jackal  of  the 
flaming  mouth  does  not  indicate  evil.  The  mouth  of  the 
jackal  appears  bright  as  the  Sun  or  fire  owing  to  its  water. 

7-  If  a ja’ckal 'facing  the  South  be  seen  to  cry  in 
answer  to  the  cry  of  another  jackal  there  will  be  death  by 
hanging.  If  it  be  found  to  do  so  facing  the  ^Yest,  there 
will  be  death  by  drowning. 

8.  If  from  1 to  7 jackals  be  seen  to  cry  together, 
there  will  respectively  be  freedom  from  cares,  the  receipt 
of  good  intelligence,  'gain  of  wealth,  gain  of  an  object  of 
desire,  cares  of  the  mind,  misery  to  tho  chief  person,  and 
the  gain  of  a carriage. 

9.  If  8,  9 or  more  jackals  bo  seen  to  cry  together, 
such  cry  signifies  nothing.  If  the  group  be  found  to  cry 


BEIHAT  SAMHITA 


208 


CH.  44.] 


ia  the  South,  just  the  reverse  of  the  effects  excepting  the 
5th  and  6th  will  occur. 

10.  If  the  cry  of  the  jackal  be  found  to  fill  roan  with 
a thrill  of  fear,  and  to  cause  the  horse  to  pass  urine  and 
dung  there  will  be  miseries. 

11.  The  cry  of  the  jackal  which  stops  at  the  sound 
of  man,  the  elephant  or  the  horse  indicates  prosperity  to 
the  town  and  to  the  army. 

12.  If  hJiehha  be  the  cry  of  the  jackal  there  will  be 
fear.  If  the  cry  be  hho-hho  there  will  be  danger  ; if  it  be 
pJiiphaj  there  will  be  death  or  imprisonment  and  if  huhu  be 
the  ciy,  there  will  be  prosperity. 

13.  If  a benefic  jackal  while  crying  a-au  should  hear 
another  cry  as  tata  and  begin  to  cry  so  in  response  or  if  it 
be  found  to  cry  beginning  with  the  sound  te4e  and  ending 
with  tJie-the  such  cries  signify  nothing  except  that  the 
animal  is  in  rut. 

14.  If  the  cry  of  a jackal  be  at  first  found  to  be  loud 
and  disagreeable  and  again  as  in  response  to  the  cry  of 
another  j ickal  there  will  be  prosperity,  gain  of  wealth  and 
the  return  of  a friend Trom  his  travels. 


CHAPTER  XLIV.  (91.) 

VI. 

On  Omens  Connected  With  Wild  Animals. 

1.  If  wild  animals  be  found  to  stay,  wander  or  to 
come  and  go  within  the  limits  of  towns,  present,  past  and 
future  fears  are  indicated  respectively;  and  if  they  are 
found  to  wander  on  all  sides  of  the  town,  such  town  will 
meet  with  ruin. 

2.  If,  when  wild  animals  enter  the  limits  of  towns, 
their  cry  is  responded  to  by  the  cry  of  country  animals, 
villages  and  towns  will  suffer  miseries;  if  their  cry  is 


cu.  45.] 


BRUT  AT  SAM  HIT  A 


20<J 


I’ospoTn^ed  to  Uy  tlie  cry  of  otlier  wiKi  animals,  towns  and 
villages  will  be  beseigod  ; but  if  such  cry  is  responded  to 
by  both  wild  and  country  animals,  w'omon  will  be  put  into 
prison  by  the  enemy. 

3.  If  wdld  animals  bo  found  at  the  gates  of  towns, 
such  towns  will  be  beseigod  by  tlie  enemy  j if  they  be  found 
to  enter  the  towns,  such  town  will  meet  with  ruin  ; if  they 
be  found  to  give  birth  to  their  young,  the  people  will  suffer 

miseries;  if  the  animals  be  found  to  die  within  towns, 

♦ 

there  will  be  fears  of  various  kinds,  but  if  they  enter  the 
liousGS  there  will  be  imprisonment. 


CHAPTER  XLV  (92.) 

VI  r. 

On  Omens  Connected  With  The  Cow. 

1.  If  the  cow  appear  weak  and  dejected  the  king  will 
suffer  miseries;  if  it  walk  striking  the  ground  with  its 
heels  there  will  be  diseases.  If  the  eyes  bo  found  full  of 
tears  or  if  it  be  found  to  fear  its  own  master  or  to  cry  at 
the  sight  of  thieves,  there  will  be  death. 

2.  If  cows  be  found  to  cry  when  unmolested  there 
will  be  ruin;  if  they  cry  at  night  there  will  be  fear;  but  if 
the  ox  be  found  to  ci  y at  night  there  will  be  good  luck.  If 
cows  be  found  to  be  tormented  by  flies  or  dogs,  there  will 
be  immediate  rain. 

3.  If  cows  while  coming  homo  with  the  cry  of  hamhha 

be  found  to  be  in  pursuit  of  bullocks  there  will  be  an 

increase  of  cows  in  the  cow- shed.  If  cows  be  found  wet  or 

with  their  hairs  on  end,  or  happy  there  will  be  an  increase 

of  wealth.  The  same  remarks  apply  to  budaloea. 

' 27 


210 


P.RIHAT  SAM  HIT  A 


[CH.  46. 


chapter  XL VI  (93). 

VIII. 

On  Omens  connected  with  the  Hobse. 

1.  If  either  the  part  just  behind  the  saddle  or  the  side 
of  a horse  be  accidently  burnt,  evil  is  indicated.  If  other- 
wise there  Avill  be  good  lack.  If  all  the  parts  of  the  body 
be  burnt,  there  will  be  misery.  If  the  part  be  seen  to  burn 
or  to  smoke,  the  effects  will  be  felt  in  2 years. 

2 If  tlie  organ  of  generation  catch  fire,  the  master’s 
harem  will  suffer  miseries.  If  the  belly  catch  hire,  the 
treasury  will  suffer  ; if  the  buttocks  or  the  tail  catch  fire, 
there  will  be  defeat  by  the  enemy.  If  the  face  and  the  head 
catch  fire,  there  will  be  success. 

3.  If  the  mane,  the  saddle — back  and  the  shoulders 
catch  fire,  there  will  be  success.  If  the  legs  catch  fire, 
there  will  be  imprisonment.  If  the  forehead,  breast,  e^ms 
or  legs  catch  fire  and  smoke,  there  will  be  defeat  ; but  if 
they  burn  only  there  will  be  success. 

4.  It  the  nasal  pit,  the  part  above  it,  the  bead,  the 
part  just  below  the  eyes  and  the  eyes  catch  fire  and  burn 
at  nighty  there  will  be  success.  If  horses  which  are  green, 
red,  black,  of  different  colors  or  blue  catch  fire  in  any  part 
of  their  body , there  will  be  the  gain  of  a desired  object. 

5.  If  the  horse  be  found  to  refuse  to  ec.t  or  drink  or 
to  fall  its  legs  striking  with  each  otlier  or  to  perspire  for 
no  apparent  cause  or  to  quake,  drop  blood  from  the  mouth 
or  to  smoke  or  not  to  sleep  at  night  and  on  the  contrary  if 
it  be  found  to  sleep  by  day  or  be  dull  or  listless  with  its 
eyes  closed  or  to  stick  its  head  to  the  ground,  there  will  bo 
misery. 

6.  If  the  horse  bo  seen  to  get  upon  another  horse 
when  the  latter  carries  a saddle  or  a man  or  if  the  king’s 
horse,  apparently  healthy,  be  found  to  meet  with  a serious 

accident,  there  will  be  misery. 

✓ *• 


CFT.  4-^).] 


RRIHAT  SAMIIITA 


211 


7.  It  the  lioi'se  be  fomid  to  raise  up  its  liead  and  neigh 
or  if  it  be  found  to  neigh  sweet  and  ]oud  as  if  out  of  j )y 
with  f(jod  in  its  mouth,  the  enemy  will  meet  with  ruin. 

8.  If  near  a horse  tliat  neighs  there  be  found  a vessel 
full  of  grain  or  curdled  inilk:_,  a Brahmin,  a temple-image, 
sandal  paste,  flow(U's,  fj-nits,  gold  and  tlie  like  or  any 
agreeable  object,  there  will  be  success. 

2.  Ahorse  that  is  satisfied  and  feels  happy  with  its 
fool  and  drink,  bit  of  the  bridle  and  saddle  trappings  and 
that  casts  a side-look  indicates  good  luck. 

10.  If  the  lijorse  be  found  to  strike  the  ground  fre- 
quently with  its  Jeft  leg,  its  master  will  travel  to  foreign 
lands-  If,  daring  twilight  hours,  lie  be  found  to  neigh 
turning  to  a deepta  quarter  the  master  will  suffer  imprison- 
ment or  defeat  in  fight. 

11.  If  the  horse  be  found  to  neigh  much  during  sleep 
or  to  flap  its  tail,  there  will  be  travel.  If  it  be  found  to 
drop  the  hairs  of  its  tail  or  to  neigh  pitiously  or  feartully  or 
to  eat  dust,  there  will  be  misery. 

12.  If  the  hoi’se  be  found  to  lie  on  its  right  side  like 
a,  box  stretching  its  right  leg,  there  will  be  sncccs.  All  that 
has  been  said  about  the  horse  applies  also  to  other  animals 
used  for  riding. 

If,  when  the  kino-  begins  to  get  on  his  back,  the 
horse  be  found  to  be  quiet  and  obedient  and  to  neigh  turn- 
ing to  another  horse  or  touch  his  right  side  with  his  mouth, 
immediate  good  fortune  is  indicated. 

14.  If  the  horse  be  found  to  pass  excrement  or  urine 
often,  or  to  refuse  to  move  even  when  wdiipped  or  to  get 
frightened  for  no  apparent  cause  or  to  shed  teai’s,  the  mas- 
ter will  suffer  miseries. 

15.  Thus  liave  been  described  omens  connected  with 
the  horse.  We  shall  now  proceed  to  treat  of  omens  coiinec- 


2)2  EBIHAT  SAMHITA  CH.  47.] 

ted  with  the  elephant — the  cutting,  breaking  &c  of  the 
tusk  especially'. 

Notes. — All  that  has  been  said  about  the  horse  applies 
also  to  the  elephant.  The  author  now  proceeds  to  state  cer- 
tain special  points  connected  with  the  latter. 

CHAPTER  XLVir  (94). 

IX. 

On  Omens  Connected  With  The  Elephant. 

1 to  6.  Stanzas  I to  G are  identical  with  stanzas  20,  21, 
22,  23,  24,  and  25,  of  chapter  xxxii  (79.)  of  part.  11. 

7.  If  the  cut  be  white,  smooth  glossy  and  emitting 
good  scent,  there  will  be  prosperity.  All  that  I now  pro- 
ceed to  state  about  the  breaking  of  the  tusks  applies  also 
to  its  dropping  down,  becoming  thin,  and  loss  of  color. 

8.  The  Devas  (gocls\  the  Asuras  (demons^,  and  Naras 
(men)  reside  respectively  at  the  root,  th.e  middle  and  the 
end  of  the  tusks  of  the  elephant.  The  effects  of  omens 
connected  with  these  parts  will  therefore  be  great,  mode- 
rate and  small  and  they  will  come  to  pass  soon,  after  a 
short  time  and  after  a long  time  respectively. 

9.  If  the  right  tusk  be  found  to  break,  the  king,  the 
country  and  the  army  will  suffer  miseries  ; and  if  the  left 
tusk  be  found  to  break,  the  master,  his  wife,  son,  family, 
priest,  the  driver  and  the  wood-men  will  suffer  miseries. 

10  If  both  the  tusks  be  found  to  break,  the  king’s  whole 
family  will  meet  with  ruin  ; but  if  the  breaking  occur  in 
a benefic  Lagna,  lunar-day  or  Nakshatra  and  the  like,  there 
will  be  an  increase  of  prosperity  If  it  occur  otherwise, 
there  will  be  an  increase  of  misery. 

11.  If  the  elephant  be  found  to  break  the  middle  of 
its  left  tusk  by  striking  it  against  milk  trees,  fruit  or  flower 
trees  or  the  banks  of  rivers,  the  ruin  of  the  enemy  is  indi- 


218 


cii48]  brimat  samhita. 

c:itt'd  and  if  the  right  tusk  be  found  to  break,,  tliere  will  be 
misery. 

12.  If  the  elephant  be  found  to  walk  unsteadily,  if 
its  ears  cease  to  move,  on  a sudden,  if  the  animal  be  of  dejec- 
ted apperance,  or  if  it  bo  f()nnd  to  put  its  trunk  to  tlie 
ground  or  to  breathe  softly  and  long,  if  tlie  eyes  be  full  of 
tears,  if  the  animal  be  found  to  sleep  always  or  to  bere.^tive 
or  to  refuse  to  eat  properly  or  to  pass  excrement,  urine,  often 

there  will  bo  misery. 

* 

13.  If  the  elephant  be  found  to  attack  and  break  at 
pleasure  ant-hills,  trunks  of  ti-ees,  decayed  trees,  shrubs  or 
branches,  if  the  eyes  be  of  rutting  appearance,  if  the  animal 
be  prepared  to  start  on  a journey,  if  while  being  adorned 
wutb  trappings  he"  be  often  found  to  throw  out  drops  of 
water  or  to  cry  oi'  if  it  begin  to  rut  at  the  time  or  coil  its 
trunk  round  its  right  tusk,  there  will  be  success. 

II.  If  the  elephant^  while  in  water,  be  found  to  be 
dragged  away  by  a crocodile,  the  king  will  meet  with  ruin  ; 
but  if  he  be  found  to  drag  the  crocodile  to  the  bank,  there 
will  be  prosperity. 

CHAPTER  XLYIII  (95). 

X 

On  The  Cawing  Op  The  Chow. 

1-  In  the  case  of  the  people  inhabiting  the  Eastern 
countries,  the  crow  on  the  right  side  indicates  good  luck  ; 
but  the  crow  of  the  crane  kind  indicates  prosperity  when 
on  the  left  side.  In  other  countries  the  case  is  otherwise. 
The  limits  of  provinces  shall  be  learnt  from  a general 
knowledge  of  the  country. 

Notes: — Countries  to  the  South  and  East  of  the  river 
Saravati  are  Eastern  countries. 

2.  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  build  its  nest  in  a dead  tree 
in  the  mouth  of  Yysakha  ihere  will  be  plenty  and  [)rosperi- 


214 


BRIHAT  g'AMHiTA. 


CU  48.] 


ty  in  th  country  ; but  if  it  be  seen  to  build  its  nest  in  a dry 
thorny  troe,  there  will  be  famine  and  fear  in  the  land. 

3.  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  build  its  nest  in  an  eastern 
branch  of  the  tree  in  the  Sai’at  season  there  will  be  rain  at 
the  beginning  of  the  season;  if  it  be  seen  to  do  so  in  a 
western  branch  in  the  raiiiv  season  there  will  be  much  rain  ; 
if  in  a northern  or  souiheru  branch  there  will  be  mode  rate 
rain  in  the  middle  two  months  of  the  two  seasons;  and  if 
it  be  seen  to  build  its  nest  on  the  top  of  a tree  there  will 
be  abundant  rain. 

4.  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  build  its  nest  in  a south- 
eastern branch  there  will  be  rain  here  and  there;  if  in  a 
south-wetern  branch,  the  jmllow  and  green  leaves  will  grow 
and  if  in  a north-western  or  north-eastern  branch  there  will 
be  prosperity. 

N (jtes  : — The  commentator  adds  that  if  the  crow  be 
seen  to  build  its  nest  in  a north-western  branch  there  wall 
be  an  increase  of  rats. 

5’  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  build  its  nest  in  reeds^  dir- 
bba  grass^  shrubs,  creepers,  crojis,  temples,  palaces  of  kings 
bouses  or  in  low  ground,  the  country  will  suffer  from  thieves, 
drought  and  disease  and  will  meet  with  ruin. 

G.  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  lay  two,  three  or  four  eggs, 
there  will  be  prosperity  ; if  five  eggs,  a foreign  prince  v-ill 
begin  to  reign  ; if  it  be  seen  to  lay  six  eggs  or  only  one  egg 
or  no  eggs  at  all,  there  wdl  be  no  prosperity. 

7.  If  the  young  ones  be  of  the  color  of  the  fragrant 
substance  known  as  Ohoraka,  there  will  be  fear  from  tliieves; 
if  of  different  colors  there  will  be  death ; if  white,  there 
will  be  fear  of  injury  from  fire  and  if  of  defective  limbs, 
there  will  be  famine. 

8.  If  a swarm  of  crows  be  found  to  enter  a village 
and  cry  for  no  apparent  cause,  the  people  will  suffer  from 


cfi.  48.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


215 


Iiungei’  and  if  they  be  seen  to  fly  round  and  round  tliero  will 
be  suffering  from  anger;  if  they  be  seen  in  swarms  there 
will  bo  quarrels. 

9.  Crows,  that  are  seen'to  harass  men  wifch  their  beaks, 
wings  and  legs,  will  increace  a person’s  enemies;  if  the 
crow  be  seen  to  fly  at  night,  the  people  will  meet  with  ruin  . 

10.  If  the  crow, be  seen  to  fly  round  and  round  from 
left  to  right,  there  will  be  fear  of  troubles  from  one’s  own 
kinsmen  ; if  it  be  seen  to  fly  round  turning  from  left  to 
riglit  tliere  will  be  fear  of  troubles  fi-om  straugors  ; if  it  be 
seen  to  turn  round gn  haste  and  fear,  there  will  be  a whirl- 
w i u d . 

11.  If  the  crow  be  seen  with  its  head  raised  and  flap- 
ping its  wings,  a person  will  meet  with  danger  in  his  tra- 
vels ; it  it  be  setm  to  steal  away  grain,  there  will  be  suffer- 
ing from  hanger  ; and  if  the  feathers  of  the  crow  be  seen  in 
an  army  there  will  be  figlit  and  theft. 

12  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  throw  ashes,  bones,  hairs 
or  feathei’s,  the  husband  will  meet  with  troubles  iii  his  bed 
and  if  it  be  seen  to  carry  gems,  tlowers  and  the  like  there 
will  be  the  birth  of  sons  and  daughters. 

13.  If  the  crow  be  seen  with  its  mouth  filled 
with  sand,  grain,  wet-eartli,  flowers  and  the  like,  there 
will  be  gain  ot  wealth;  and  if  it  be  seen  to  dreg  av;ay  ves- 
sels from  places  frequented  by  men  of  various  classes  there 
will  be  fears  of  various  kinds. 

14.  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  strike  with  its  legs 
vehicles,  weapons,  shoes,  umbrellas,  shadows  of  men  or  the 
men  themselves  there  will  be  death;  if  it  be  seeu  togo 
round  a person  or  to  throw  flowers  on  him  as  if  by  way  of 
worship,  the  person  will  be  respected  and  if  it  be  seen  to 
pass  excrement  on  a person,  there  will  be  gain  of  food. 


216 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


CH.  48.] 


15.  A person  will  gain  that  object  which  is  brought 
to  him  by  the  crow  and  he  will  lose  that  which  is  carried 
away  by  the  crow.  If  such  object  be  of  yellow  color_,  there 
will  be  gain  or  loss  of  gold  ; if  it  be  an  article  made  of 
cotton,  there  will  be  gain  or  loss  of  cloth  ; and  if  of  white 
color^  there  will  be  gain  or  loss  of  silver. 

16.  If,  in  tlie  rainy  season,  the  crow  be  seen  to  caw 
from  milk  trees,  from  the  Arjuna  tree,  the  Yanjula  tree,  the 
banks  of  rivers,  sand  banks,  there  will  be  rain  ; and  in  other 
seasons,  if  the  crow  be  seen  to  bathe  in  dust  or  in  water^ 
the  sky  will  be  overcast  with  clouds. 

17.  If  two  crows  be  seen  to  cry  fearfully  from  a tree 
there  will  be  fear  of  great  danger  and  if  they  be  seen  to  cry 
turning  to  water  or  the  clouds  there  will  be  rain. 

1 8.  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  move  its  wing  fearfully 
and  strike  with  its  feet  the  branches  of  trees  there  will  be 
fear  of  injury  from  destructive  fires  j if  it  be  seeY  to  throw 
into  the  house  a red  substance,  a burnt  substance  or  straw  or 
apiece  of  wood,  there  will  also  be  fear  of  injury  from  fire. 

19.  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  cry  from  the  house  tur- 
ning to  to  the  East,  South,  VYest,  or  Norths  the  master  of 
the  house  will  respectively  suffer  from  kings,  robbers,  quar- 
rels and  loss  of  cows,  if  such  quarter  be  a deepta  one. 

20.  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  cry  turning  to  the  East 
when  such  quarter  is  benefic,  there  will  be  meeting  with  an 
officer  of  the  king,  or  a friend  and  there  will  also  be  a gain 
of  gold,  Salya  rice  and  cooked  rice  prepared  in  sugar. 

21.  If  the  crow  bo  seen  to  cry  turning  to  the  South- 
east when  such  quarter  is  beuelic  there  will  be  a meeting 
with  a person  living  by  fire  and  the  gain  of  a woman  and  of 
precious  metals  ,*  if  it  be  seen  to  cry  turning  to  the  benefic 
Soudi,  there  will  be  a gain  of  black  gram,  horse-gram  and 
excellent  meals  and  a meeting  with  singers- 

ry  D 


Cii.  48.] 


BRIIJA.T  SAMIIITA 


217 


(22) .  If  tlie  crow  be  seen  to  cry  turning  to  tlio  (beni- 
fic)  South  west,  there  will  be  meeting  with  a messenger  and 
tlio  g‘hn  of  articles  of  luxury,  curdled  milk,  oil,  flesh  and 
good  ineds  and  if  it  be  seen  to  cvy  turning  to  the  (benefic) 
west,  there  will  be  the  gain  of  flesh,  liquor,  grain  and  the 
gems  of  the  sea- 

(23) .  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  cry  turning  to  the 
(benefic)  north-west,  there  will  he  the  gain  of  weapons,  of 
lotus,  twilling  creepers,  fruits  and  meals;  and  if  it  be  seen 
to  cry  turning  to  the*(beuefic)  north,  there  will  be  the  gain 
of  food,  horse  and  cloths* 

(24) .  If  the  ci'Qw  be  seen  to  cry  turning  to  the  (bene- 
fic) notli-east,  them  will  be  the  gain  of  ghee  and  of  oxen. 
The  same  remarks  apply  to  the  crow  found  seated  in  the 
several  parts  of  a person’s  house. 

(25) .  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  pass  close  to  the  ears  of 
a person  at  the  commencement  of  a journey,  there  will  bg 
good  luck  and  the  gain  of  a desired  object  ; and  if  the  crow 
be  seen  to  come  flying  and  cawing  towards  the  traveller  he 
W'ill  mturn  from  his  journey. 

(26) .  ff  the  crow  be  first  seen  to  cry  on  the  left  side 
and  then  on  the  rigid  side  of  a traveller,  he  will  be  robbed 
of  his  money  and  if  the  reverse  be  the  case,  there  will  be 
the  gain  of  money. 

(27) .  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  ciy  and  follow  the 
tiMveller  on  the  leftside,  there  will  be  gain  of  wealth; 
in  the  case  of  the  people  of  eastern  countries,  the  crow 
must  follow  the  traveller  on  the  right  side  instead  of  on 
the  left. 

28.  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  fly  crying  towards  the 
traveller  on  the  left  side,  there  will  be  obstacles  in  the 
wiy;  but  if  the  person  be  not  a traveller,  he  will  meet 
with  good  luck. 


28 


218 


krihat  samiiita 


[cii  48. 


29.  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  cry  first  on  the  ri»ht  side 
find  then  on  the  left,  there  will  be  the  gain  of  a desired 
object;  if  it  be  seen  to  cry  turning  to  the  traveller  or  fly 
before  him  there  will  be  immediate  gun  of  wealth. 

30.  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  cry  turning  to  the  traveller 
and  fly  awa)’’  behind  him  on  the  rigid  side,  the  person  will 
soon  get  wounded , also  if  the  crow  bo  seen  to  stand  on 
one  leg  and  cry  turning  to  the  Moon,  the  person  will  get 
wounded. 

31.  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  stand  on  one  lecf  turning 
to  the  Sun  and  scratch  its  wings  with  its  beak,  the  chief 
person  will  suffer  at  the  hands  of  his  enemies. 

32.  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  cry  in  a field  fall  of  crops, 
there  will  be  the  gain  of  a field  with  crops  in  it ; but  if 
such  crow  be  malefic  in  character,  the  traveller  will  meet 
with  grief  before  crossing  the  boundary. 

33.  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  cr}^  in  trees  in  Avhich  there 

are  fruits  and  flowers  and  which  are  covered  with  glossy 
and  tender  leaves  and  are  fragrant  milky^  without 

wounds,  erect  and  beautiful,  there  will  be  the  gain  of 
wealth. 


34.  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  cry  in  plrtc3s  covered  with 
ripe  crops  and  fall  of  grass,  ia  houses,  temples,  palaces  of 
kings,  the  mansions  of  the  rich,  green  spots,  graneries  and 
places  where  there  are  benefic  obj-^cts,  there  will  be  the 
gain  of  wealth. 

35»  If  the  crow  bo  seen  to  cry  seated  in  the  tail  of  a 
cow  or  a snake-hole  there  will  be  the  sight  of  a serpent ; if 
it  be  seen  to  ciy  from  the  back  of  a buffalo  there  will  be 
fever  that  very  day  ; and  if  from  a bush,  there  will  be  an 
imperfect  gain  of  an  object  of  desire. 

36.  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  ciy  from  a heap  of  rubbish 
or  from  a bone  on  the  loft  side  the  person  will  meet  with 


cii.  48.] 


BRIHAT  sAiinirA. 


210 


obitacloi  ill  his  attempt  to  gain  aa  object ; and  if  it  be  seen 
to  cry  from  an  elov^atcd  spaco,  a burnt  place,  or  a place 
struck  by  lightning*,  there  will  be  slaughter- 

37.  Il  the  crow  be  seen  to  cry  from  a good  spot  with 
thorny  trees  in  it  there  will  be  success  of  an  undertaking, 
but  cpiarrels  at  the  same  time  j if  it  bo  seen  to  cry  from  a 
thorny  tree,  there  will  be  quarrels  and  if  from  a place  over- 
grown with  creepers,  there  will  bo  imprisonment. 

38.  If  the  crow*  be  seen  to  cry  from  a tree  whoso  end 
has  Ijeen  cut  off,  there  will  bo  suffering  from  sword  cut  if 
from  a dried  tree,,  tlioi  ewill  bo  quarrel  ; if  from  a dung  hill 
either  beforo  or  beh‘ind,  there  will  be  the  gain  wealtli. 

39.  If  the  crow  bo  seen  to  cry  from  tho  body  or  the 
limbs  of  a dead  person  there  will  be  deatlis  ; aiid  if  it  be  seen 
to  breaking  a bone  wdth  its  beak_,  there  wdll  bo  a frac- 
ture of  bones. 

40.  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  cry  holding  in  his  mouth  a 
s tring,  a bone,  a pioce  of  wood,  a thorn  or  any  weak  sub- 
stance, there  will  respectively  bo  suffering  from  a snake^ 
from  diseases,  from  tusked  animals_,  thieves,  creepers  and 
fire. 

41.  If  tlie  crow  be  soven  to  cry  holding  in  its  mouth  a 
wliite  flower,  an  impure  substance  or  flesh, there  will  bo  gain 
of  wealth  to  the  travrller ; if  it  bo  seen  to  cry  with  its 
lioad  raised  and  striking  its  wings  on  pts  sides,  there  will 
be  obstacles  in  the  wa}*. 

42.  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  cry  holding  in  its  month  a 
string,  a strap  of  leatlier,  or  a twining  creeper,  there  wull  bo 
imprisonment  and  if  it  be  seen  to  cry  from  a stone,  there 
will  bo  a meeting  with  a new  traveller  who  has  suffered 
mucli  from  foot- journey. 

43.  If  crows  bo  seen  to  oxchaugo  food  with  one  another 
there  wdll  bo  great  happiness  3 if  the  ina^e  and  the  female 


BRIHAT  SAMtilTA 


[CH.  48. 


crows  be  beard  to  cry  together  there  will  be  the'gaiu  of 
a woman. 

44  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  cry  from  a woll-h'led  water 
pot  on  the  head  oE  a woman,  there  will  be  the  gain  of  a 
woman  or  wealth;  if  it  be  seen  to  strike  the  pot  with  its 
feet,  the  person’s  son  will  meet  with  danger  ; and  if  it  be 
seen  to  pass  excrement  into  the  pot,  there  will  be  the  gain 
of  meals. 


45-  If,  when  an  army  begins  to  encamp  in  a place^ 
the  crow  be  seen  to  cry  striking  its  wings  on  its  sides,  the 
army  will  meet  with  success  in  some  other  place  ; and  if  it 
be  seen  to  cry  without  moving  its  wings,  there  will  be  only 
fear  and  nothing  serious  will  happen. 

46.  If  the  crow,  accompanied  by  a vulture  and  a he- 
ron, be  seen  to  enter  an  army  without  fighting  there  will 
be  good  luck  and  iE  they  happen  to  be  at  strife  there  will 
be  fight  between  the  enemies. 

o 


47.  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  cry  from  the  back  of  a pig^ 
there  will  be  imprisonment ; if  it  be  seen  to  cry  from  the 
backs  of  two  pigs  covered  with  mire,  there  will  be  the  gain 
of  wealth;  if  from  the  back  of  an  ass  or  a camel,  there  will 
be  prosperitjn  According  to  some,  if  the  crow  be  seen  to 
cry  from  the  back  of  an  ass  there  will  be  imprisonment. 

48*  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  cry  from  the  back  of  a 
horse,  there  will  be  gain  of  a vehicle ; if  it  be  seen  to  cry 
following  another  crow,  there  will  be  blood -shed.  The 
same  remarks  apply  to  other  birds. 


Notes : — These  must  be  carnivorous  birds  such  as 
the  owl,  the  vulture,  the  hawk  and  the  like. 


40.  The  crow  in  the  several  points  of  the  compass 
indicates  the  same  effects  as  those  described  for  other  oml- 
i\oas  birds. 


BHIIIAT  samhita. 


221 


cn.  IS.j 

iO.  Iftlie  crow  be  heard  to  cry  caio  from  its  nest,  the 
cry  signifies  nothing  ; but  if  it  be  heard  to  cry  hav  there 
will  bo  hilarity  of  mind ; and  ifJca  be  the  cry,  there  will  bo 
a meeting  with  an  intimate  friend. 

5h  If  hara  bo  the  cry  of  the  crow,  there  will 

be  quarrel;  if  hum-lcuru  be  the  cry  there  will  be  joy; 

if  hata-lcata  bo  the  cry  there  will  be  gain  of  rice  prepared 

in  curdled  milk;  if  he  he  or  hu  hu  be  the  cry,  there  will  be 

gain  of  wealth  to  the  traveller. 

* 

52.  If  hhare-hhare  he  iliQ  Gvy  oi  the  crow  there  will 
be  a meeting  with  a foot  passenger.  If  hlia-hlia  be  the  cry  > 
the  traveller  will  meet  with  death  ; if  hhala-hhala  be  the 
cry  there  will  be  ah  obstacle  to  journey  and  rain  that  same 
day. 

5.3.  If  hcc  ha  be  the  cry  of  the  crow,  there  will  be 
obstacles  ; if  ha  ha4ee  be  the  cry  there  will  be  injury  to 
meals;  \nmva-havahe  ihe  cvy  there  will  be  joy;  and  if 
hagahu  bo  the  cry  there  will  be  imprisonment. 

51.  If  hara  hav  bo  the  cry  of  the  crow  there  will  bo 
rain  ; if  gibd  be  the  cry  there  will  be  fear,  if  vat  be  the  cry 
there  will  be  gain  of  cloths  ; if  ha'^aya  be  the  cry  there  will 
be  a meeting  of  the  Sudras  and  the  Brahmins. 

55.  If  phat  be  the  cry  of  the  crow  there  will  be  gain 
of  fruits  ; phala  he  the  cvy ^ there  will  be  the  sight  of 
serpents;  if  iazl  be  the  cry,  there  will  be  suffering  from 
blows;  if  stree  be  the  cry,  there  will  be  the  gain  of  women; 
if  gat  bo  the  cry  there  will  be  the  gain  of  a cow;  and  if 
2>ut  be  the  cry  there  will  be  the  gain  of  flowers. 

5G.  If  tahutahu  be  the  cry  of  the  crow  there  will  bo 
fight ; if  gtthii  bo  the  cry  there  will  be  injury  from  fire ; if 
hate-hate  be  the  cry,  there  will  be  fight;  and  such  sounds  as 
fahidi;  clwiticlii}  he  he  ha  and  pimnoha  indicate  bad  luck. 


BRIHAT  SAMOITA- 


[on.  48. 


^>*7,  If  two  crows  be  seen  to  cry  together  or  to  move 
together,  the  effects  will  bo  the  same-  All  the  above  re- 
marks apply  to  omens  connected  with  other  birds ; and  all 
that  has  been  said  about  the  dog  applies  also  to  wild 
tusked  animals. 

58.  If  the  creatures  of  land  and  water  be  seen  to 
change  their  nature  in  the  rainy  season  there  will  be 
abundant  rain  and  if  they  do  so  in  any  other  season,  there 
will  be  great  fears.  If  there  be  no  honey  in  the  hives,  the 
country  will  be  wasted ; and  if  bees  black  at  the  head  bo 
seen  to  disappear,  there  will  be  deaths. 

59.  If  ants  be  seen  to  throw  their  eggs  in  water  there 
will  be  no  rain  and  if  they  be  seen  to  ascend  a bank  and 
approach  the  foot  of  a tree  with  their  eggs,  there  will  be 
immediate  rain. 


60.  Effects  of  omens  ocucrring  at  the  commencement 
of  a work  will  come  to  pass  that  same  day.  Omens  shall 
be  observed  at  the  time  of  commencement  of  a work,  a 
journey  or  re-entry  into  the  house  after  a journey.  Sneez- 
ing is  said  never  to  indicate  good  luck. 

61.  The  learned  in  the  science  say  that  a king  who 
observes  omens  carefully  and  regulates  his  acts  according 
to  their  indications  enjoys  prosperity  : — that  he  will  succeed 
in  all  his  attempts,  that  he  will  successfully  afford  protec- 
tion to  his  subjects  and  that  he  will  gain  all  his  objects  and 
will  be  in  the  enjoyment  of  good  health. 

62.  According  to  some,  the  cry  of  a creature  beyond 
the  distance  of  a krosa  signiffes  nothing.  If  a person  meets 
with  a bad  omen  once,  the  evils  may  bo  escaped  by  his 
performing  the  Pranayamcc  Ji  times;  if  he  meets  with  it  a 
second  time  he  shall  perform  the  Pranayama  16  times  ; 
and  if  he  meets  with  a bad  omen  a third  time,  he  shall 
return  from  his  journey. 


CH.  49.] 


EBIUAT  SAMniTA 


223 


Notos  : — A krosa=tlie  range  of  tlie  voice  in  calling  or 
lialloing. 


CHAPTER  XLTX.  (06.) 

Supplementary  to  Omens. 

XT. 

1.  A person  learned  in  tlie  science  of  omens  sliall 
make  predictions  taking  into  account  tlie  dik  (direction), 
place,  motion,  sound, week  day,  the  Nakshatra,  the  Muliurta, 
the  rising  sign,  the  Karana  (half  a lunar  day),  the  rising 
Navamsa  and  the  fixd,  moveable  and  the  double  nature  of 
signs  and  tbeii’  strength  or  weakness. 

2.  In  the  case  of  persons  who  do  not  proceed  on  a 
journey,  omens  are  divided  into  two  sorts — the  stable  and 
the  unstable.  Omens  pointing  to  the  king,  the  messenger, 
the  sp3^  and  foreign  lands  as  well  as  those  connected  with 
troubles  and  kinsmen  are  known  as  unstable. 

3.  Omens  pointing  to  death  by  hanging,  abduction  of 
a woman,  meals,  thieves,  fire,  rain,  festivals,  sous,  torture, 
quarrels  and  fears  are  known  as  stable  omens  if  the  sign 
occupied  by  the  Moon  at  the  time  be  a fixed  one  and  they 
are  known  as  unstable  omens  if  the  sign  occupied  by  the 
Moon  at  the  time  of  their  occurrence  be  a moveable  one. 

4.  Omens  occurring  in  hard  and  firm  places,  in  stone 
houses,  in  temples,  in  land  and  in  waters  are  known  as 
stable;  and  omens  occurring  on  weak  or  moving  objects 
are  known  as  unstable — ^the  latter  omens  point  to  gain. 

5.  Omens  occurring  when  the  rising  sign,  the 
Kakshatra,  the  Muhurta  and  the  Dik  are  watery  ones  and 
those  occurring  in  water  and  on  new  and  full  Moon 
periods  and  which  are  at  the  same  time  cleepta  (malefic)  and 
attended  with  sound  point  to  gain  3 also  if  the  creatures  of 
water  be  Santa  (bcnefic)  there  will  be  rain. 


224 


BRIIiAT  SAMHITA. 


[ciT.  40 


6.  Ominous  cries  occurring  in  the  direction,  rising 
sign,  Muhurtas  and  places  appropriate  to  fire  and  when  the 
Sun  is  Deepta  (malefic)  point  to  injury  by  fire.  Ominous 
cries  of  a malefic  character  occurring  in  thorns  and  leafless 
creepers  when  the  Karana  at  the  time  is  Bhadra  and  when 
the  rising  sign  is  either  Capricorn  or  Aquarius  point  to 
thieves. 

7.  If  the  creatures  of  the  yillage,  malefic  in  cha- 
racter and  in  their  tone  and  motion,  be  found  to  cry  from 
thorny  trees  and  an  either  side  of  the  south-western  quar- 
ter when  the  rising  sign  is  either  Aries  or  Scorpio  there 
will  be  quarrels. 

8.  If  creatures,  malefic  in  character,  be  found  to  cry 
with  their  necks  bent  to  the  ground  and  from  one  of  the 
four  corners  when  the  rising  sign  is  Cancer  or  when  the  ri- 
sing sign  or  Navamsa  is  either  Taurus  or  Libra  there  will 
be  a meeting  with  a wmman  and  the  woman  will  be  one  of 
the  class  belonging  to  the  particular  corner. 

9.  If  the  omen  occur  in  an  odd  lunar  day-,  in  one  of 
the  prime  quarters,  and  when  the  rising  sign  is  a malefic 
one  and  if  the  creature  be  of  the  male  kind  there  will  l)e 
a meeting  with  a man  and  if  the  omen  be  of  the  herninph- 
rodite  kind  there  will  be  a meeting  with  a hermaphrodite- 

Notes. 

If  the  omen  be  one  of  a creature  of  the  female  sox  and 
if  it  occur  in  one  of  the  corners  or  on  an  even  lunar  day 
when  the  rising  sign  or  Navamsa  is  that  of  Taurus  there 
will  be  a meeting  with  a person  of  the  class  belonging  to 
the  north-eastern  quarter. 

10.  If  the  omen  be  malefic  in  character  and  occur 
when  Leo  is  the  rising  sign  or  Navamsa  or  when  the  Sou 
occupies  the  rising  sign,  the  chief  person  will  procsed  on  a 
jonrneyto  foreign  lauds. 


cu.  49.] 


BRIIIAT  SAMHITA 


225 


11.  Ah  the  time  of  coinmencemont  of  a work  if  the 
rising  ^ign  be  odd  when  counted  from  the  sign  occupied  by 
the  Sun,  tlie  work  will  end  well  and  if  it  be  an  even  sign 
the  attempt  will  fail. 

12.  If  the  oraeo  be  malefic  in  charncter  and  occur 
when  the  Sun  occupies  the  Iwth  house  from  the  rising  sign, 
the  ]')erson  concerned  will  lose  his  right  eye  ; and  if  at  the 
time,  the  Sun  occupy  the  rising  sign  and  be  aspected  by 
malefic  planets  the  person  will  lose  both  his  eyes;  it  at  the 
time,  the  Sun  occupy  sign  Leo  and  be  aspected  by  malefic 
planets  the  pei'son  will  become  lame  or  deaf  or  an  idiot. 

13.  If  at  the 'time  of  occurrence  of  an  omen  malefic 
planets  occupy  the  sixth  house  and  be  aspected  at  the  same 
time  by  other  malefic  planets,  the  person  concerned  will 
receive  a wound  in  the  part  of  body  which  corresponds  to 
such  sixth  house.  All  that  has  been  said  by  me  regarding 
wounds,  moles  and  the  like  in  my  Jataka  applies  here  also 
(vide  stanzas  24  &;  25  of  CH.  V of  Yaraha  Mihira’s  Brihat 
J ataka} . 

14.  If,  at  the  time  of  query,  the  rising  sign  or  ISTa- 
vamsa  be  a movable  one  the  name  of  the  person  with  whom 
there  wdll  be  a meeting  will  consist  of  two  syllables,*  if  the 
rising  sign  or  Navamsa  be  a fixed  one  the  name  will  consist 
of  four  syllables  and  if  it  be  both  movable  and  immovable 
the  name  will  be  a combination  of  two  names  and  will  con- 
tisb  of  three  or  five  letters. 

15.  If  the  powerful  planet  be  Mars  the  letters  will 
be  of  the  group  /.'a,  Z,-Aa,  ga,  gha,  nga ; if  the  powerful  planet 
beYenus  the  letters  will  be  of  the  gvo\\\)  ci,  ja, 

nj  ( ; if  the  planet  be  Mercury  the  letters  will  be  those  of 
thegrotip  ia^tJia,da,  dim  na;  if  the  planet  be  Jupiter  the  letters 
will  belong  to  the  gronr  ia,  tli^,  da,  dho,na;  if  the  planet  be 
Saturr.  the  letters  belciig  to  the  group  pa,  phi,  ha,  hha,  ma  ; 

29 


226 


ERIHAT  SAMHITA 


[cn.  50. 


if  tliG  planet  be  the  Moon. the  letters  belong  to  the  group^  ya 
T'l,  Ictj  V'lj  sa^  sh-i,  sa  and  if  the  planet  be  the  Suiij  the  let- 
tei's  belong  to  the  group  of  vowels  from  a to  an. 

16.  Also  in  the  cases  of  the  planets  from  the  Sun  to 

Saturn_,  t^®  will  be  tbe  names  of  the  'Dovas  Agni,  Va- 

runa,  Subramania^  VisJmn,  Indva,  Jndrcini  and  Brahma  res- 
pectively. The  particular  name  required  shall  be  deter' 
mined  from  the  number  of  syllables  it  consists  of. 

17.  If  at  tbe  titne  of  queiy,  relating  to  the  age  of  a 
person,  the  lord  of  the  rising  sign  be  the  Moon,  Mars,  Mer- 
cery, Venus,  Jupiter,  the  Snn  or  Saturn,  the  age  will  res~ 
pectively  be  that  of  infancy  (1  to  4),  boy-hood  (5  to  8), 
period  succeeding  investiture  with  the  thread  [9  to  12), 
youth  (13  to  32)  middle-age  (33  to  50),  old  age  (51  to  70) 
and  dotage  (above  70). 

CHAPTER  L r97) 

On  Effective  Periods 

1.  In  the  case  of  the  Sun,  the  effects  will  occur 
after  a fortnight;  in  the  case  of  the  Moon,  after  a month  ; 
in  the  case  of  Mars  after  the  same  period  as  that  stated  for 
the  retrograde  motion  of  planets;  in  the  case  of  Mercury 
the  effects  will  occur  before  his  disappearance  and  in  the 
case  of  Jupiter,  after  a year, 

2.  In  the  case  of  Venus,  the  effects  will  occur  after 
6 months  ; in  the  case  of  Saturn  after  a year  and  in  the  case 
of  Rahu  after  6months.  If  the  matter  refers  to  a Solar  eclipse 
the  effects  will  occur  after  a year  and  in  the  case  of  solar 
spots  known  as  Twashta  and  Keelaka  the  effects  will  be 
felt  that  same  day  (vide  stanzas  6 and  7 of  CH  HI  Part  I). 

3.  Effects  of  phenomena  connected  with  the  appea- 
rance of  dark  comets  will  occur  after  three  months  ; those  of 
phenomena  connected  with  the  appearance  of  white  comets 
will  occur  after  seven  days  ; effects  of  halos,  rainbows  during 


BRTflAT  SAMHITA 


227 


ciT.  50.] 


twiliglifc  hours  and  color  of  tho  twilight  sky  and  of  clouds 
will  be  felt  alter  svevii  da3's. 

4.  Effects  indicated  by  abnormal  changes  of  tempera- 
turOj  by  the  appearance  of  fruits  and  tiowers  out  of  season, 
by  the  llaming  horizon  ai  d by  portents  relating  to  the 
motion  of  unmoving  bodies  and  to  the  refusal  to  move  ot 
m Auiig  bodies  and  to  abnormal  births  vyill  be  felt  after  G 
months. 

5.  Effects  indicated  by  portents  relating  to  the  com- 
pletion of  an  event  without  an  ;igent,  to  earth. quakes,  to 
severe  calamities^  to  malefic  symptoms  such  as  those 
connected  wiili  hotna  tire  and  by  portents  relating  to  tbe 
drying  of  a wet  substance  and  to  the  course  of  rivers  will 
occur  after  C months. 

6.  Effects  of  portents  connected  with  pillars  and  the 

t 

like,  with  graneries,  tlie  temple-images-their  speech,  weep- 
ing quaking  and  swetting,  cattle-tight  and  figlit  between  tlie 
people  of  a house  during  twilight  hours  and  the  appearance 
of  the  rainbow  at  night  and  lightning  will  be  felt  after  three 
weeks. 

7.  Effects  of  portents  connected  with  the  increase  of 
worms,  rats,  flies  and  snakes  and  <4'  those  connected  with 
the  sound  of  birds  and  animals  and  with  the  floatingr  of  a 
lump  of  earth  on  water  will  be  felt  after  three  months. 

8.  Effects  indicated  by  dogs  and  the  like,  by  the  ci-ea- 
tnres  of  the  village  bearing  their  young  in  the  woods,  h\’ 
the  entry  of  wihl  anima.ls  into  the  village  and  the  several 
abnormal  phenomena  connected  with  bee-hives,  town  gates, 
and  Indra  Dvvaja  will  be  felt  after  a year  or  a longer  period. 


9.  Effects  c:>nnected  with  swarms  of  the  iackal  and 

t) 

tbe  vulture  will  be  felt  after  10  days.  Those  of  phenomena 
connected  with  mvstorions  musical  sound  will  be  felt  that 
same  day.  Those  of  phenomena  connected  with  disagree- 


228 


ERIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  60. 


able  sounds  will  be  felfc  after  a forfcniglit  and  also  effects  of 
phenomena  connected  with  ant-hills  and  openings  on  the 
surface  of  the  earth  will  also  be  felt  after  a fortnight. 

10.  Effects  of  protents  relating  to  the  appearance  of 
fire  where  there  is  no  fire  and  the  shower  of  g*hee,  oils, 
serum  of  flesh  and  the  like  will  be  felt  that  same  day;  and 
the  effects  of  casual  words  of  women  and  children  will  bo 
felt  after  a month  and  a half. 

11.  Eff(3cts  of  portents  relating  to  umbrellas,  piles  of 
bricks,  the  sacrificial  post,  fire,  and  seeds  will  be  felt  after 
three  months.  According  to  some,  effects  of  portents  relat- 
ing to  umbrellas,  gates  and  towers  will  be  felt  after  a mouth. 

12.  Effects  of  portents  relating  to  the  friendly  union 
of  creatures  of  deadly  natural  enmity,  to  sounds  heard  in 
the  sky  and  to  the  union  of  the  cat  and  the  mungoose  with 
the  rat  will  be  felt  after  a month. 

Effects  of  the  appearance  of  cloud-castles  will  be 
felt  after  a month  and  effects  of  portents  relating  to  juice, 
gold,  flag-staff,  houses  and  to  dust  storms  and  smoke  will  also 
be  felt  after  a month. 

14.  Effects  of  phenomena  occurring  in  the  eight  con. 
stellations  from  Aswini  will  be  felt  after  9^  1,  8,  1,  1,  fi,  3, 
and  3 months  respectively  and  the  effects  of  those  occurring 
in  the  constellation  of  Aslesha  will  be  felt  that  same  da3^ 

15.  Effects  of  phenomena  occurring  in  the  ten  constell- 
ations fi-om  Magha  will  be  felt  after  1,  6,  6,  3,  4,  8,  3,  6,  1 
and  1 months  respectively.  Effects  of  those  occurring  in 
the  constellations  of  P.  Ashadha  and  U-  Ashadlia  will  be 
felt  after  four  months  and  the  effects  of  those  occurring  in 
the  constellation  of  Abhijit  will  be  felt  that  same  day. 

16.  Effects  of  phenomena  occurring  in  the  remaining^  6 
constellations  from  Sravana  will  be  felt  after  7,  8,  i^,  3,  3 
and  o mouths  respectively. 


cn.  51.] 


BRIIIAT  SAMHITA. 


C29 


17.  If  tlio  effects  bo  not  felt  soon  after  tbe  peri*  ds 
mentioned,  tliey  will  bo  felt  with  greater  severity  strer 
double  the  period,  if  no  steps  be  adopted  I'or  their  expiariou 
by  the  gift  of  gold,  gems  and  eO'.vsaTid  by  the  perfuiniance 
of  expiatory  ceremonies  with  the  help  of  Urahuilns. 


CIIAPTEIl  LI  (h8). 


On  The  Constellations 

1&2:  The  number  of  Stars  of  the  various  constella- 
tions from  Aswini  are  3^  3,  Q,  5,  3,  1,  5,  8,  (!  5,  8,  15,  5,  1, 
1,  5,  4,  3,  11,  2^  8,  3,  5,  100,  15,  8 and  32  and  these  num- 
bers also  represent  the  various  stellar  periods. 

3.  In  matters  connected  with  mari-iao-e  these  numbers 
represent  years  after  which  the  effects  indicated  will  be 
felt.  Recovery  from  fever  and  the  like  will  begin  after  so 
many  days.. 

4 & 5.  The  following  table  contains  the  names  of  the 
Devns  presiding  over  tlte  several  constellations 


Cons  tel  la- 
tions. 


Levas. 


Constella- 

tions. 


Devas. 


1 


Aswini 


2 Bharani 

3 Krittika 
4|B()hini 
hjMrigasirsha 
o' Ardra 
7|Panarvasu 

S.Pnshva 

1 

9 Aslesha 

10  Magha 

1 1 P.  Phalguni 

1 2 U.  Phalgun 

13  Hast  a 

14  Chitra 


AswiniDevas 

Yama 

Agni 

Prajapati 

Soma 

Rudra 

Aditi 

Brihaspati 

iSnrpa 

Pitris 

Bbaga 

Aryama 

Savita 

Tvvashtri 


1 5 Swari 
1 6 Yisnkha 
1 7,  A nniadha 
Is,  Jve.vlita 
1 9 IMula 
ih)'!k  Ashadli  a 
21  U,  Asbadha 
22lAbhijit 
23|Sravana 
24  Sravishta 
Satabliishak 
B Bhadrapada 
27|UBhadiapada 
28i  Revati 


2o 

20 


Yayu 
Ind  ragni 
Alitra 
In  dra 
Prajapati 
A pa 

Visvadeva 
B ra  h m a 
Vishnu 
Vasu 
Yaruua 
Ajaikapat 
Abirbudhnya 
Pus  ha 


beihat  samhita 


[CH.  ol. 


230 

C).  Of  tlipse  28  constellations_,  those  of  U.  Phalgiini, 
IT.  Asliadlia  niid  (J.  Bhadrapada  togethai-  with  the  cons- 
tella^^ion  of  Rohini  are  known  as  (Dliniva)  stable  asterisms. 
Coronation  ol;  kings,  expiatory  "ceremonies,  planting  of  trees, 
tlie  building  of  towns,  acts  of  public  utility,  the  sowing  of 
seeds  and  acts  of  permanent  effects  shall  be  commenced 
when  the  Moon  passes  through  the  stable  asberisms. 

7.  The  constellations  of  Mula,  ArJra,  Jyeshta  and 
Aslesha  are  known  as  (Tikshna)  sharp  asberisms-  Punish- 
ment, mesmerism,  exorcism,  imprisonment  of  person,  acts 
of  torture,  of  separatoin  or  of  union  shall  be  commenced 
when  the  Moon  passes  through  the  sharp  asberisms. 

8.  The  constellations  of  P.  Phalguni,  P.  Ashadha,  P. 
Bhadrapada,  Bharani  and  Magha  are  known  as  (Uggra.) 
severe  aster  isms.  Acts  of  disgrace,  destruction,  deceit, 
imprisonment,  poison,  burning,  beating  with  weapons  and 
the  like  shall  be  done  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
severe  asberisms. 

9.  The  constellaiions  of  Hasta,  Aswini,  and  Pushya 
are  known  as  (Laghu)  light  asberisms.  Sales,  acts  of  sexual 

acquisition  of  knowledge,  wearing  of  ornaments,  arts? 
sculpture,  mediciue  purchase  of  carriage  and  the  like  shall 
be  commenced  when  the  Moca  passes  through  the  light 
asberisms. 

10,  The  contellations  of  Anuradha,  Chitra,  Revati  atid 
Mrigasirsha  are  known  as  (Mriduj  soft  asberisms.  Acts  of 
friendship,  sexual  union,  the  purchase  of  cloths,  and  tlie 
wearing  or  making  of  ornaments,  any  auspicious  deeds  and 
music  shall  be  commencd  when  the  Moon  passes  through  tije 
soft  asberisms. 

11.  The  constellations  of  Krittika  and  Visakha  are 
known  as  (Miidu  Teekshana')  soft  and  sharp  asberisms  and 
they  produce  effeets  of  mixed  character.  Sravana,  Sravi- 


CIT.  51  ] 


BRTHAT  SAMTTfTA 


231 


slit.-ij  Saf abhish'ik,  TIa'ita  aiid  Swati  are  nsteristns 
Avliicb  wlien  the  IMoon  passe.s  shall  be  cdinineiiced  woi  ks  of 
a inovino:  char.icter. 

12.  A person  shall  get  shaved  when  qlie  a^terisni  of 
II  a Rtn,  Chitra,  Sravishta  Swati,  M rigasirgha,  Sravana_, 
Satabhishak,  Revati;,  AswiTii^  Jjeshta,  Puslivn;,  or  Runarvasu 
Tnay  liappen  to  rise  or  in  the  JMnhoorta  of  sueh  asterisnis  oi’ 
when  the  Moon  passes  through  them,  or  when  tlie  astei  isin  is 
a benefic  one  for  the  person — when  it  is  an  even  0!ie  or  the 
ninth  one  from  the. asterism  occupied  by  the  Moon  at  the 
time  cf  a pers^tn’s  birth. 

13.  A person  who  has  just  bathed  and  is  wet,  one 

V 

that  proceeds  on  a 'journey,  a person  who  has  dressed  and 
adorned  himself,  one  who  has  got  himself  rubbed  oil,  one 
who  has  taken  his.  tneales  and  a person  who  has  received 
blows  in  a field  of  battle  shall  not  get  themselves  shaved. 
Shaving  is  prohibited  in  twilight  hours,  hours  of  night,  on 
Tuesdays,  Saturdays  and  Sundays,  on  Rikta  (a)  Tithies,  on 
the  ninth  lunar  day  and  when  the  Kama  is  Bhadra. 

14.  AVhen  directed  by  the  king  or  with  tlie  consent  0£ 
the  Brahmins  or  on  occasions  of  marriage  or  pollution,  or 
wheii  a person  is  released  from  jail,  or  at  the  commencemei 
of  sacrificial  rites,  a person  may  get  shaved  on  any  day  in 
the  month. 

15  M’hen  the  Moon  passes  through  the  contellations  of 
Hasta,  Lloola,  Sravana,  Mrigaseersha  and  Pushya  a person 
shall  perform  deeds  befitting  a male. 

16.  The  'various  ceremonies  of  purification,  religious 
rites,  the  practice  of  austerities  and  the  wearing  of  Zone  or 
the  Sacred  belt  shall  be  commenced  when  the  Moon  passes 
through  the  asterisrn  of  Hasta,  Revati,  Swati,  Annradha, 
Bushya  and  Chitra  and  when  Jupiter  is  in  conjunction  with 
Mercury,  Venus  or  the  Mocn. 


(a).  Itikta  Tithi  vide  Stanza  2 next  Chapter. 


2n2 


BEIHAT  SAMHITA 


[CII.  52. 

17*  The  ceremony  of  boarino*  the  ear  sball  be  per- 
formed when  tlie  rising  sign  is  that  of  a benefic  planet  and 
not  occnpied  by  malehc  planets,  when  benefic  planets  occu- 
py the  1 1th  and  3rd  house',  when  Jupiter  occupies  the  ris- 
ing sign  or  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the  asterisni  of 
Pushy  a,  llobinij  Chitra,  Sravana  or  Revati. 

18,  All  works  commenced  when  tlie  12th  house,  the 
Kendras,  and  the  8th  house  are  not  occupied  by  planets, when 
malefic  planets  occupy  the  3rd,  6th  and  Hth  houses  and  when 
Jupiter  or  Venus  occupies  the  rising  sign  or  one  of  the 
Kendras,  will  end  susccessfully.  House-bulding  or  entry 
into  a liouse  shall  be  cornmeticed  when  the  rising  sign  is 
benefic  to  the  person  or  when  it  is  a fixed  sign. 


chapter  lit  (99). 

On  Lunar  Days  and  Half  Lunar  days. 

1.  The  lords  of  the  15  lunar  days  are  respectivey  (1) 
Brahma,  (2)  Vidhata,  (3)  Hari,  (4)  Yama,  (5)  Moon,  (0) 
Sul)ramaQya,  (7)  Indra,  (8)  Yasu,  (9)  Sarpa,  (10)  Dharma^ 
(11)  Siva,  (12)  Savita,  (13)  Manmatta  (14)  Kali  and  (15) 
Viswadeva. 

2.  The  N ew-j\;[oon  day  is  sacred  to  the  Pitris.  A 
person  shall  commence  works  suited  to  the  Devas  presiding 
over  particular  lunar  days.  The  1st,  6th  and  11th  lunar 
days  are  known  as  Nanda;  the  2nd,  7th,  and  12th  lunar 
days  are  known  as  Bhadra;  the  3rd,  8th  and  13th  lunar 
days  are  known  as  Yijaya;the  4th,  9th,  and  14th  lunar 
days  are  known  as  Bikta  and  the  5th,  10th  and  15th  lunar 
days  are  known  as  Poorna. 

3.  Works  directed  to  be  done  in  particnlar  Naksbatras 
shall  be  done  on  lunar  days  sacred  tothe  lords  of  the  Naksha- 
atras.  The  same  remarks  apply  toKaranas  and  Muhoortas^ 


cn.  52.] 


BRIIIAT  SAMITTTA 


2;]3 


4.  4310  lords  of"  tlie  seven  k a ran  ns — Bava,  Balava, 

Konlnva,  'Taitiln,  Gai’a,Vanijn,nnd  Yisht';,  are  Indi’a.Brahrna_, 
Miti’a,  Aryjona_,  Bhu,  Sree  and  Yama. 

Notes:  — Karana  is  half  a lun  ir  day.  The  seven  Karanas 

•/ 

mentioned  above  are  known  as  Adhfuva  or  Movable,  and 
wlien  eiglit  times  repeated  occupy  the  space  from  tlie  second- 
lialf  of  the  first  day  in  the  Moon’s  increase  to  the  first-halt 
of  the  14th  day  in  its  wane- 

5.  The  four  Dhruva(fixed jKaranas  are  Sakuni,Cbatush- 
pada,  Naga  and  Kimstughna  and  tliey  begin  from  the  second 
half  of  the  l4th  dq-y  of  the  waning  moon*  These  are  sacred 
to  Kali,  Yrisha,  vSarpa  and  Yayii. 

6.  In  a Bava  Karana  shall  be  done  deeds  o"^  an 

r 

auspicious,  a moveable  or  a fixed  character  as  well  as  deeds 
for  the  promotion  of  a person’s  health  or  comfort.  In  a 
Balava  Karana  shall  be  done  acts  of  charity  and  acts  of 
help  to  Brahmins.  In  a Koulava  Karana  shall  be  done 
joyful  deeds  and  those  for  the  acquisition  of  friends  and  in 
a Taitila  Karana  shall  be  done  deeds  liked  by  the  public  at 
lai’ge  and  also  houses  shall  bo  built. 

7.  In  a Gara  Karana  lands  shall  be  tilled,  seeds  sovvn^ 
houses  built  and  the  like.  In  a Yanik  Karana,  works  of  a 
fixed  nature  shall  ba  done  as  well  as  dealings  with  mer- 
chants. In  a Yishti  or  Bhadra  Karana,  auspicious  deeds 
shall  not  be  done  but  acts  aimed  at  the  ruin  of  enemies  and 
those  connected  with  poison  may  be  done- 

8.  In  a Sakuni  Karana  a person  shall  do  acts  for  the 
increase  of  his  health  and  comfort,  shall  take  medicine  and 
shall  learn  or  repeat  theMoola  maiitras  (magical  formulae.) 
In  a ChatushpadaKarana  a person  shall  do  deeds  connected 
with  cows,  Brahmins,  the  Pitris  and  the  king.  In  a Naga 
Karana  a person  shall  do  works  of  a fixed  nature,  cruel 
deeds,  acts  of  stealth  and  wicked  deeds.  In  a Kimstughna 

*30 


BRTHAT  ? AM  HIT  A. 


2S4 


[CH.  53, 


Karaua,  a person  shall  do  any  work  for  tlie  increase  of  his 
health  and  comfort  as  well  as  auspicious  deeds. 

Notes, — A.  Muhurta  is  48  minutes.  The  12  hours  of 
day  and  12  hours  of  night  are  each  divided  into  15 
Muhurtas.  The  15  day-Muhurtas  are  sacred  respectivaly 
to  (1)  Eudra^  (2)  Sarpa^  (3)  Mibra^  (4j  Pitri^  (5)  Vasu,  (6) 
Vara_,  (7)  Yiswadeva;  (8)  Yidhi,  (9)  Brahma,  (10)  Indra, 
(11)  Indragni  (12)  Daitya,  (13)  Yaruna,  (14)  Aryama  and 
(15)  Bhaga.  The  15  night — Muhurtas  are  sacred  respecti- 
vely to  (1)  Eeswara  (2)  Ajapada,  (3)  Ahirbhudhnya,  (4) 
Pusha,  (5)  Nasatya  (6)  Yama,  (7j  Yanhi,  (8)  Dliata,  (9) 
{Sasi,  (10)  Aditya,  (11)  Guru,  (12)  Achyuta,  (13)  Arka,  (14) 
Twashta  and  (15)  Yayu.  Of  the  15  night — Muhurtas,  the 
1st,  2nd,  0th  and  7th  shall  be  rejected  for  all  auspicious 
purposes. 


CHAPTER  LIII  (100.) 

On  Marriage  Lagnas  and  Nakshtras. 

1.  Marriages  shall  take  place  when  the  Moon  passes 
through  the  asterism  of  Rohini,  U.  Phalguni,  U.  Ashadha, 
U.  Bhadrapada,  Revati,  Mrigasirsha,  Mula,  Auuradha^ 
Magha,  Hasta  or  Swati  ; when  the  rising  sign  is  Yirgo, 
Libra  or  Goniini ; when  the  benefic  planets  occupy  other 
than  the  7th^  8bh  and  i2th  houses,  when  the  Moon  occupies, 
the  2ud,  ord  or  11th  house;  when  the  malefic  planets 
occupy, the  3rd,  6th,  8th  and  11th  houses;  when  Yenus  does 
not  occupy  the  6th  house  and  vvheu  Mars  does  not  occupy 
the  8tli  house  ; and, 

2.  \Yhen  the  rising  sign  is  other  than  the  2ud,  9tb, 
or  8th  house  from  the  Lagua  iu  the  horoscope  of  the  bride- 
groom or  the  bride;  wheu  at  the  time  tlie  course  of  the 
ISuu  is  benefic;  when  the  Moon  does  not  occupy  the  same 
3ign  with  the  Sun,  Mars,  Saturn  or  Yenus  ; or  wheu  she  is 
between  two  maledc  planets;  when  the  Yoga  is  neither  the 


cti.  54.] 


BKIHAT  SAMFHTA. 


23^ 


Vyatipada  nor  that  of  Vaidhriti  ; when  tliG  Karana  is  other 
than  Vishti  ; when  the  lunar  day  is  otlier  than  a Ilikta  one; 
wln-n  th(*  week  day  is  other  than  that  of  a malodc  planet  j 
when  the  xlyaria  is  other  than  the  DakshiDayaiia  ; when  the 
luontli  is  other  than  that  of  Chaitra  or  Pousha  and  when 
the  risinu:  Navainsa  is  a human  N'lvamsa. 

CD 


CHAPTER  LIV  (lOi)  (a). 

On  TheNakshairas  or  The  Moon  in  the  Asterisrns. 

1.  A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  Aswini  will  be  fond  of  ornaments,  will  be  of 
fine  api'earance^  of  amiable  manners,  skilled  in  work  and 
intelligent. 

o 

A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asteri.'iin  of  Bharani  will  be  succe.ssfui  at  work,  truthful, 
free  fiom  diseases,  able  and  free  from  grief. 

2.  A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  though  the 
asterism  of  Krittika  will  be  a glutton,  fond  of  the  wives  of 
other  men,  of  bright  appearance  and  of  wide-spread  fame. 

A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  Rohini  will  be  truthful,  will  not  covet  the 
prO{)erty  of  other  men,  will  be  of  cleanly  habits,  of  sweet 
speech,  of  firm  views  and  of  fine  appearance. 

3.  A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  Mrigasirsha  will  be  of  no  firm  views,  will  be 
able,  timid,  of  good  speech,  of  active  habits,  rich  and  will 
indulge  in  sexual  pleasures. 

A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  Ardra  will  be  insincere,  of  irascible  temper, 
ungrateful,  troublesome  and  addicted  to  wicked  deeds. 

4.  A,  person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  Punarvasu  will  be  devout  and  of  patient  habits, 


(a)  Tliis  chapter  appears  as  Chapter  XYI  of  Brihat  Jataka. 


2S6 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[cH.  b4. 


will  live  in  comfort,  will  be  good  notured,  quietj  of  wioiig 
views,  sickly,  thirsty  and  pleased  with  trifles. 

5.  A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  Pashya  will  have  a control  over  his,,  passions, 
will  be  generally  likeil,  will  be  learne-l  in  the  Sastras,  wdll 
be  rich  and  will  be  fond  of  doing  acts  of  charit}^'. 

A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  f through  the 
asterism  of  Aslesha  will  not  be  attentive  to  the  work  of 
other  men,  will  be  a promiscuous  eater,  will  be  sinful, 
uugrateful  and  skilled 'in  deceiving  other  men. 

6.  A person  born  when  the  Moonj^passes  througli  the 
asterism  of  Ma.gha  will  have  numerous  servants,  will  wor- 
ship the  Devas  and  the  pitris,  and  will  be  engaged  in 
important  works. 

A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  P.  Phalguni  will  be  of  swmet  speech,  will  be 
liberal  in  his  gifts,  will  be  of  wandering  habits  and  will 

O''  O 

serve  under  kings. 

7.  A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  U.  Phalguni  will  be  generally  liked,  will  earn 
money  by  his  learning  and  will  live  in  comfort  and  luxury. 

A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  Hasta  will  be  of  active  habits,  full  of  -resources, 
shameless,  merciless,  a thief  and  a drunkard. 

8.  A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes^through  the 
asterism  of  Chitra  will  wear  clothes  of  various  colors,  and 
flowers  and  will  be  of  beautiful  eyes  and  limbs. 

A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  Swati  will  be  of  a mild  and  quiet  'nature,  will 
control  his  passions  and  desires,  will  be  skilled  in  trade  and 
merciful,  will  be  unable  to  bear  thirst,  will  be  of  sweet 
speech  and  will  beidisposedto  do  acts  of  charity. 


CH.  54.] 


BRIIIAT  SAMHITA. 


237 


9.  A pei'son  bora  wlien  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
nsterism  of  Visakha  will  be  jealous  of  another’s  prosperity, 
will  be  a niggard,  will  be  of  bright  appearatico  and  of 
distinct  speech,  will  be  skilled  in  the  art  of  earning  money, 
will  be  disposed  to  bring  about  enmity  between  persons. 

A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterisin  of  Anuradha  will  be  rich,  will  live  in  foreign 
lands,  will  bo  unable  to  bear  hunger  and  will  be  inclined  to 
move  from  place  to  place. 

10.  A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  Jyesljta  will  have  very  few  friends,  will  be 
cheerful,  virtuous, and  of  irascible  temper. 

A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  Moolai  will  be  haught}^,  rich,  happy,  not  dis- 
posed to  injure  other  men,  of  firm  views  and  will  live  in 
luxury. 

11.  A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  P.  Ashadha  will  have  an  agreeable  wife,  will’  be 
proud  and  will  be  attached  to  friends. 

A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  U.  Ashadha  will  be  obedient,  will  be  learned  in 
the  rules  of  virtue,  will  possess  many  friends,  will  be  grate- 
ful, will  return  favors  received  and  will  be  generally  liked. 

12.  A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through 
the  asterism  of  Sravaua  will  be  prosperous  and  learned, 
will  have  a liberal  minded  wife,  will  be  rich  and  of  wide- 
spread fame. 

A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the  as- 
terism of  Dhanishta  will  be  liberal  in  his  gifts,  wdll  be 
rich,  valient,  will  be  fond  of  music  and  will  be  a niggaad. 

13.  A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  Satabhishak  will  be  harsh  in  his  speech,  will  be 
truthful,  will  suffer  grief,  will  conquer  his  enemies,  will 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


238 


5* 


fclionglitlessly  engage  in  works  and  will  be  ol:  independent 
wav^. 

v 

A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the  as- 
terism  of  P.  Bhadrapada  will  suffer  from  grief,  will  place 
his  wealth  at  the  disposal  of  his  wife,  will  be  of  distinct 
speech^  will  be  skilled  in  earning  money  and  will  be  a 
niggard. 

14.  A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through 
the  asterism  of  IJ.  Bhadrapada  will  be  an  able  speaker,  will 
behappy^  will  possess  children  and  grand-children,  will  con- 
(pier  his  enemies  and  will  be  virtuous. 

A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the  as- 
terism of  Pevati  will  possess  perfect  limbs,  will  be  of  amia- 
ble manners,  will  be  deeply  learned,  will  never  covet  the 
property  of  other  persons  and  will  be  rich. 

Notes : — The  effects  described  in  this  Chapter  will 
fully  come  to  pass  if  the  Moon  be  powerful. 

CHAPTEP.  LY,  (102). 

On  The  Division  Of  The  Zodiac. 

1.  Sign  Aries  consists  of  the  asterisms  of  Aswini, 
and  Bharani  and  the  first  quarter  of  Krittika.  Sign  Taurus 
consists  of  the  last  three  quarters  of  Krittika,  the  asterism 
of  Rohini  and  the  first  two  quarters  of  Mrigasirsha. 

2.  Sign  Gemini  consists  of  the  last  two  quarters  of 
Mrigasirsha,  the  aisterism  of  Ardra  and  the  first  three  quar- 
ters of  Punarvasu.  Sign  Cancer  consists  of  the  last  quar- 
ter of  Punarvasu  and  the  asterisms  of  Pushya  and 
Aslesha. 

3.  Sign  Leo  consists  of  the  asterisms  of  Magha  and 
P.  Phalguni,  and  the  first  quarter  of  U.  Phalguni.  Sign  Virgo 
consists  of  the  last  three  quarters  of  U.  Phalguni,  the  as- 
terism of  Hasta,  and  the  first  two  quarters  of  Ohibra. 


cii.  56.] 


BKIHAT  SAM  HIT  A 


239 


4,  Sign  Lib  a consists  of  the  last  two  quarters  of 
Chitra,  the  astei’ism  of  Swati^  and  the  first  three  quai'ters  of 
Yisakha.  Sign  Scorpio  consists  of  the  last  quarter  ofV^isa- 
kha  and  the  asterisms  of  Annradha  and  Jyeshta. 

5 Sigfn  Saofittari  consists  of  the  asterisms  of  Mula 
and  P.  Ashadha  and  the  first  quarter  U-Ashadha.  Sign 
Capricorn  consists  of  the  last  three  quarters  of  U.  Asliadha 
the  asterism  of  Si'avana  and  the  first  two  quarters  of  Sra- 
vishta. 

6.  Sign  Aquarius  consists  of  the  last  two  quarters 
of  Sravishta,  the  ^asterism  of  Satabhishak,  and  the  first 
three  quarters  of  P.  Bhadrapada.  Sign  Pisces  consists  of 
the  last  quarter  of  P.  Bhadrapada  and  the  asterisms  of  U. 
Bhadrapada  and  "Bevati, 

7.  Signs  Aries,  Leo,  and  Sagittari  begin  res- 
pectively with  the  asterisms  of  Aswini,  Magaha  and  Mula 
and  the  several  signs  end  with  the  fiirst,  second,  third  of 
fourth  quarters  of  the  odd  asterisms  succeeding  the  said 
three  asteiisms. 

CHAPTER  LYI  (103). 

On  Maeriages. 

1.  If  at  the  time  of  marriage  the  rising  sign  be  occu- 
pied  by  the  Sun  or  Mars,  the  woman  will  become  a widow  ; 
if  it  be  occupied  by  Rahu,  the  son  will  die  ; if  by  Saturn, 
there  will  be  poverty;  if  by  Venus,  Mercury  or  Jupiter, 
the  woman  will  remain  chaste ; and  if  by  the  Moon,  the 
woman  will  die  early. 

2.  If  at  the  time  of  marriage,  the  2nd  house  from  the 
ascendant  be  occupied  by  the  Sun,  Saturn,  Rahu  or  Mars 
there  will  be  much  suffering  from  poverty  ; if  it  be  occu- 
pied by  Jupiter,  Venus  or  Mercury  the  woman  will  become 
rich  and  will  not  become  a widow  and  if  the  2nd  house  be 
occupied  by  the  Moon,  she  will  get  many  sons. 


240 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA 


[CH.  56. 


3.  If  afc  the  time  of  Marriage,  the  3rd  house  from  the 
ascendant  be  occupied  by  the  Saiij  the  Moon,  Mars,  Jnpiter, 
Venus  or  Mercury  the  woman  will  have  many  sons  and  will 
become  rich  ; if  the  3rd  house  be  occupied  by  Saturn,  the 
woman  will  be  liked  by  all  and  if  it  be  occupied  by  Rahu, 
she  will  die  early. 

4.  If  at  the  time  of  marriage,  the  4th  bouse,  from  the 
ascendant  be  occupied  by  Saturn,  the  woman  will  not  have 
much  milk  ; if  it  be  occupied  by  the  Sun  and  Moon,  the 
woman  will  not  be  generally  liked  ; if  it  be  occupied  by 
Rahu,  hei  husband  will  have  another  wife , if  it  be  occupied 
by  Mars  she  will  have  very  little  wealth ; and  if  it  be  occu-. 
pied  by  Venus,  Jupiter  or  Mercury,  the  woman  will  be  happy 

5.  If  at  the  time  of  Marriage  the  5th  house  from  the 
ascendant  be  occupied  by  the  Sun  or  Mars  there  will  be 
death  of  sons  j if  it  be  occupied  by  Jupiter,  Venus  or  Mer- 
cury, the  woman  will  get  many  sons;  if  by  Rahu,  she  will 
die  early,  if  by  Saturn  she  will  be  afflicted  with  serious  di- 
seases ; and  if  it  be  occupied  by  the  Moon  she  will  get 
daughters. 

b.  If  at  the  time  of  Marriage,  the  6th  house  from  the 
ascendant  be  occupied  by  Saturn,  the  Sun,  Rahu,  Jupiter  or 
Mars,  the  woman  will  be  liked  by  all  for  her  good  nature 
and  she  will  shew  due  respect  to  her  father-in-law  and 
others ; if  it  be  occupied  by  the  Moon,  she  will  become  a 
widow  ; if  by  Venus,  she  will  become  poor  , and  if  by  Mer- 
cury she  will  become  prosperous  and  quarrelsone. 

7.  If- at  the  time  of  Marriage,  the  7th  house  from  the 
ascendant  be  occupied  by  Saturn,  the  woman  will  become  a 
w idow  ; if  it  be  occupied  by  Mars,  she  will  suffer  imprison- 
ment; if  by  Jupiter;  she  will  suffer  from  torture;  if  by  Mer- 
cury she  will  suffer  miseries;  if  by  Rahu,  she  will  suffer  loss 
of  wealth  ; if  by  the  Sun  she  will  suffer  from  diseases  ; if  by 


CH.  52.] 


BRIHAT  SAMEIITA. 


233.^/ 

Ili0  Moon,  slie  will  travel  to  foreign  lauds  and  if  by  Venus, 
she  will  die  earl}^ 

8.  If  at  the  time  of  Marriage,  the  8tli  bouse  from  tlic 
ascendant  bo  occupied  by  Jupiter  or  Mercury,  there  will  be 
separation  between  husband  and  wife;  if  it  be  occupied  by 
the  Moon,  Venus  or  Rahu  the  woman  will  die  early;  if  by 
the  Sun  she  will  escape  widowhood ; if  by  Mars  she  will  b 3 
afflicted  with  diseases  ; and  if  by  Saturn  she  will  become  r ich 

aud  will  bo  liked  by  her  husband. 

.« 

9-  If  at  the  time  of  Marriage  the  9th  house  from  the 
ascendant  be  occupied  by  Venus,  the  Sun,  Mars  or  Jupiter, 
the  woman  will  bfe  charitable  ; if  it  be  occupied  by  Mercury 
she  will  be  free  from  diseases  ; if  by  Rahu  or  Saturn  she  will 
be  barren  ; and  if  by  the  Moon,  she  will  bear  daughters  and 
will  be  of  a wandering  nature. 

10.  If  at  the  time  of  Marriage,  the  10th  house  from 
the  ascendant  be  occupied  by  Rahu,  the  woman  will  become 
a widow  ; if  it  be  occupied  by  Saturn  and  the  Sun,  she  will 
be  inclined  towards  sinful  deeds ; if  by  Mars,  she  will  die 
early  ; if  by  the  Moon,  she  wil  become  poor  and  unchaste, 
and  if  by  any  of  the  other  planets  she  will  be  rich  and  liked 
by  all. 

11.  If  at  the  time  of  Marriage  the  lltli  house  from  the 
ascendant  be  occupied  by  the  Sun,  the  woman  will  got  many 
sons  ,*  if  it  be  occupied  by  the  Moon,  she  will  become  inch; 
if  by  Mars,  she  will  got  sons  ; if  by  Saturn,  she  will  become 
very  w^ealthy if  by  Jupiter,  she  will  be  of  long  life;  if  by 
Mercury,  she  will  live  in  plenty  ; if  by  Rahu  she  wdll  die 
before  her  husband  and  if  by  Venus  she  will  become  weal- 
thy. 

12.  If  at  the  time  of  marriage  the  12th  house  from  tho 
ascendant  be  occupied  by  Jupiter,  the  woman  will  become 
rich  ; if  it  bo  cccu[)ied  by  tho  Sun,  she  will  become  poor  , 

o i 


234 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  53. 

if  by  the  Moon^  she  will  lose  her  wealth  ; if  by  Rahu,  she 
•will  become  unchaste  ; if  by  Yenus,  she  will  be  chas^t©  ; if 
by  Mercury  she  will  get  sons  and  grand-sons  and 

if  by  Saturn  or  Mars,  she  will  be  fond  of  liquor. 

13.  The  most  excellent  hour  for  marriage  is  the  hour 
in  the  evening  when  cows  are  being  driven  home,  and  the 
isky  is  covered  with  dust  raised  by  their  hoofs  striking 
against  the  ground  while  running.  The  married  woman 
will  get  wealth,  health  and  sons  and  will  be  prosperous. 
This  hour  is  known  as  Godhuli  Lagna.  In  the  case  of  such 
hour,  the  character  of  the  Nakshatra,  the  Tithi,  the  Yoga,^ 
the  Karana,  or  the  Lagna  need  not  be  considered.  Such 
an  hour  will  make  a person  happy  and  prosperous, 

CHAPTIIR  LYII  (104). 

On  The  Effects  of  Planetary  motions. 

1.  The  truths  of  Science  have  for  a long  time  remained 
scattered  for  want  of  arrangement.  They  will  become  fit 
for  ready  use  if  arranged  and  systamatized. 

2.  The  influence  exercised  by  the  planets  over  human 
affairs  as  they  move  through  the  signs  of  the  Zodiac  is 
various.  I desire  to  describe  their  effects  in  stanzas  written 
in  a variety  of  metres  and  the  learned  are  requested  to 
excuse  this  wish  in  me.  (a). 

Kotes’. 

(a).  Each  stanza  of  this  Chapter  is  written  in  a dis- 
tinct metre  and  contains  the  name  of  the  metre  also.  On 
account  of  this  restriction  the  ideas  expressd  in  many 
stanzas  are  curious  and  far  fetched. 

3.  One  who  has  read  the  wmrks  of  Mandavya  on  the 
present  subject  will  not  like  my  treatise,  and  if  he  likes  it 
at  all,  he  will  like  it  in  just  the  same  way  as  a person  will 
like  his  wife  whom  he  knows  to  be  unchaste. 


en.  53.] 


ehihat  samhita. 


Notes. 

This  stanza  is  written  in  tlie  Jaghanacliapala  metre 
wliicli  term  also  means  a harlot. 

4.  When  tlie  Sun  passes  tlirough  the  Gth,  3rd  and  10th 
signs  from  the  sign  oocupied  by  the  Moon  at  the  time  of 
birth  of  a person  (a)  the  effects  will  be  benefic  ; when  the 
Moon  passes  though  the  3rd,  6th,  10th;  7th;  and  1st  signs 
from  the  Moon,  the  effects  will  also  bo  benefic ; when  Jupiter 
passes  through  ,tlie  7th;  9th,  2nd  and  5th  signs  or  when 
Mars  and  Saturn  pass  through  the  Gth  and  3rd  signs  or  when 
Mercury  passes  through  the  6th;  2nd,  dth,  10th  and  §th 
signs  from  the  Moon  the  effects  will  be  benefic.  But  when 
Venus  passes  through  the  7th;  6th  and  10th  signs  from  the 
Moon  the  effects  will  be  malefic.  All  the  planets  produce 
benefic  effects  wheri  they  pass  through  the  Hth  house  from 
the  Moon. 

5.  When  the  Sun  passes  through  the  sign  occupied  by 
the  Moon  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person  such  person 
will  suffer  from  fatigue,  from  loss  of  wealth;  chest-pain 
and  foot  journey.  When  the  Sun  passes  through  the  2nd 
house  from  the  Moon  the  person  will  suffer  from  loss  of 
wealth;  discomfort;  eye-diseases  and  deceit.  When  the  Sun 
passes  through  the  3rd  house  from  the  Moon;  the  person 
will  return  to  his  place;  will  become  rich;  happy  and  free 
from  diseases  and  will  destroy  his  enemies.  When  the 
Sun  passes  throngh  the  4th  house  from  the  MooD;  the 
person  will  suffer  from  diseases  and  will  be  hindered  frona 
enjoying  the  company  of  an  excellent  wife. 

.6  When  the  Sun  passes  through  the  5th  house  from 
the  Mooii;  the  person  will  suffer  from  diseases  and  from 
enemies.  When  the  Sun  passes  through  the  Gth  house, 

(a).  la  future  we  shall  only  employ  the  expression  “ from  th;® 
Moon  to  denote  the  sign  occupied  fey  the  Moon  at  the  time  of  birth  oi  ^ 
pergon. 


EEIEAT  SAMHITA 


236 


CPI.  dS.*' 

the  person  will  be  freed  from  diseases,  from  enemies  and 
from  grief.  When  the  Sun  passes  through  the  7fch  house 
the  person  will  suifer  from  the  fatigues  of  foot-journey^ 
from  chest-pain^  from  humility  and  consumption.  When 
the  Sun  passes  through  the  8th  house  form  the  Moon,  the 
person’s  own  beautiful  wife  will  not  be  of  use  to  him. 

7.  When  the  Sun  passes  through  the  9th  house  from 
the  Moon,  the  person  will  suffer  from  accidents,  humility, 
diseases,  mental  pains  and  opposition.  When  the  Sun  pas- 
ses through  the  10th  house  from  the  Moon,  the  person  will 
achieve  great  success  and  will  gain  his  object.  When  the 
Sun  passes  through  the  11th  house,  the  person  will  achieve 
successs,  will  return  tohis  place,  will  be  respected,  will  be- 
come prosperous  and  will  be  freed  from  diseases.  When 
the  Sun  passes  through  the  I2th  house,  the  person  will  gain 
his  object  only  by  the  adoption  of  just  and  proper  means 
and  not  otherwise, 

8.  When  the  Moon  passes  through  the  sign  occupied 
by  herself  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person,  such  person  will 
get  meals,  excellent  bed  and  clothes*  When  the  Moon 
passes  through  the  2nd  house,  the  person  will  suffer  loss 
of  respectability  and  of  vealth  sni  will  also  suffer  from  obs- 
tacles.  When  the  Moon  passes  through  the  Srd  house,  the 
person  will  get  clothes,  women,  and  wealth  in  abundance. 
VVhen  the  Moon  passes  through  the  4th  house,  the  person 
will  have  no  liking  for  mountains  and  will  be  as  cruel  as 
a serpent. 

9.  When  the  Moon  passes  through  the  bth  house 
from  the  sign  occupied  by  herself  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a 
person,  such  person  will  suffer  from  humilit}^,  diseases,  pain 
of  mind  and  obstacles  in  bis  path.  When  the  Moon  passes 
though  the  6th  house,  the  person  will  enjoy  wealth,  comfort 
and  the  ruin  of  his  enemies  and  will  be  freed  from  diseases. 
When  the  Moon  passes  through  the  7th  house,  the  person 


237 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[cn.  r'jS 

Tvill  enjoy  a carriage,  respectability,  a good  bed^  good  meals 
and  wealth.  When  the  Moon  passes  through  the  8th  house 
the  person  will  live  in  fear  of  evils. 

10.  When  the  Moon  passes  through  the  9th  house 
from  the  sign  occupied  by  herself  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a 
person,  such  person  will  suffer  from  imprisonment,  pain  of 
mind,  fatigue  of  body  and  chest-pain.  When  the  Moon 
})asses  through  the  -10 th  house,  the  person’s  orders  will  bo 
carried  out  and  he  will  succeed  in  his  work.  When  the  Moon 
passes  through  the  11th  house, ""the  person  will  enjoy  pros- 
perity, will  get  new  friends  and  wealth.  When  the  Moon 
passes  through  the  I2th  house,  he  will  suffer  from  injuries 
received  from  a bullock 

11.  When  Mars  passes  through  the  sign  occupied  by 
the  Moon  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person,  such  person  will 
suffer  from  troubles.  When  Mars  passes  through  the  2nd 
house  from  the  Moon,  the  person  will  suffer  from  the  king, 
from  quarrels,  from  euemes  and  from  disgrace.  He  will 
also  suffer  from  bilious  and  windy  complaints  and  from 
thieves. 

12.  When  Mars  passes  through  tho  3rd  house  from  the 
Moon  there  will  be  gain  of  objects  from  robbers  and  from 
children  the  person  will  become  of  bright  appearance,  his 
orders  will  bo  carried  into  effect,  tho  will  get  wealth,  blan- 
kets, metals,  gems  and  the  like. 

13.  When  Mars  passes  though  the  4th  house  from  tho 
Moon,  the  person  will  suffer  from^f ever,  belly-ache  and  blood 
dischargespind  he  will  also  suffer  miseries  through  associa- 
tion with  wicked  meu. 

14.  When  Mars  passes  through  th©  5th  house  from  the 
Moon,  tho  person  will  sutler  from  enemies,  diseases,  fears 
and  troublesome  children  and  his  appearance  will  become 
less  bright. 


cn.  -S^.] 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA 


238 


15.  When  Mcirs  passes  through  the  6fch  house  from 
the  Moodj  thel^person  will  be  freed  fromi^enemies  and  quar- 
t’cels  ; he  will  obtain  gold,  corals  and  copper  and  will  lead 
an  independent  life- 

16.  When  Mars  passes  through  the  7th  house  from  the 
Moon,  the  person  will  suffer  from  a quarrelsome  wife,  from 
diseases  of  the  eye  and  from  belly-ache.  When  he  passes 
through  the  8th  house,  there  will  be  bloodshed,  loss  of  wealth 
and  of  respectability;  and  wbeu  ho  passes  through  the  9th 
house,  the  person  will  suffer  disgrace  and  loss  of  wealth  and 
the  like  ; his  gait  will  be  slow  and  he  will  become  weak. 

17.  When  Mars  passes  through  the  10th  house  from 
the  Moon,  the  person  will  obtain  much  wealth  and  when  he 
passes  through  the^l  1th  house,  he  will  obtain  success  and 
renown  and  will  rule  over  a province. 

IS.  When  Mars  passes  through  the  I2t‘h  house  from 
the  Moon,  the  person  will  suffer  from  various  expenses, 
troubles,  diseases  of  the  eye,  from  an  angry  wife  and  from 
bilious  complaints  though  he  may  be  born  in  the  family  of 
Indra. 

19-  When  Mercury  passes  through  the  sign  occupied 
by  the  Moon  at  the  time  of  birth  of  person,  such  person 
will  suffer  loss  of  wealth  caused  by  the  advice  of  wicked 
men,  by  tale  bearers,  by  imprisonment  and  quarrels.  He 
will  besides  receive  disagreeable  intelligence  when  in  his 
journey. 

20.  When  Mercury  passes  through  the  2nd  house 
from  the  Moon,  the  person  will  suffer  disgrace  and  gain 
success  and  wealth.  When  he  passes  through  the  3rd  house 
the  person  will  get  friends  and  will  be  afraid  of  troubles 
from  the  king  and  from  his  enemies  and  he  will  quit  his 
place  from  his  own  wicked  deeds, 

21*  When  Mercury  passes  through  the  4th  house 
from  the  Moon  a person’s  knismeu  and  family  will  increase 


230 


ERIHAT  SAMHITA 


[cii  53. 


and  tliere  will  be  mucli  gain.  When  Mercury  passes  througb 
the  5th  house  from  the  Moon,  the  person  will  quarrel  with 
bis  wife  and  sons  and  will  not  enjoy  the  company  of  an  ex- 
cellent wife. 

22.  When  Mercury  passes  through  the  Cth  house 
from  the  M(>on;  the  person  will  be  liked  by  all  and  will  gain 
renown.  When  Mercury  pnsses  through  the  7th  house  the- 
person’s  appearance  will  become  less  bright  and  there  will 
be  quarrels-  When  Mercury  passess_,  tlirough  the  8th  liouse 
the  person  will  get  sons,  success,  cloths  and  wealth  and  will 
become  happy  and  powerful. 

23  When  Mercury  passes  through  the  9th  liouse  from 
Moon  the  person  will  meet  with  obstacles  to  his  work. 
When  Mercury  passes  through  the  10th  hous-o  from  the 
Moon  the  persords  enemies  wdll  meet  with  ruin  and  the  per- 
son will  get  wealth,  will  enjoy  the  company  of  his  wife  and 
will  be  dressed  in  flannel. 

24.  When  Mercury  passes  through  the  11th  house 
from  the  Moon  tlie  person  wdll  get  wealthy  comfort,  sons, 
w’omen,  friends  and  conveyance,  will  be  happy  and  will 
receive  good  intelligence.  When  Mercury  passes  through 
the  l2th  house  from  the  Moon,  the  person  wdll  suffer  disgrace 
from  his  enemies,  will  suffer  from  diseases  and  will  nob 
enjoy  the  company  of  a good  wife. 

25.  When  Jupiter  passes  through  the  sign  occupied 
by  the  Moon  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person,  such  person 
wdll  lose  his  wealth  and  intelligence,  wdll  quit  his  place  and 
will  suffer  from  many  quarrels-  AVlieii  Jupiter  passes 
through  the  2nd  house  from  the  Moon,  the  person  will  have 
no  enemies  and  will  enjoy  w'ealth  and  women. 

2G-  When  Jupiter  passes  through  the  3rd  house  from 
the  Moon,  the  person  will  quit  his  place  and  wdll  meet  with 
obstacles  in  bis  work.  When  Jupiter  passes  through  the  4tli 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA 


[cH.  53. 

Louse  from  the  Moon,  the  person  will  suffer  from  troubles 
caused  by  Lis  kinsmen,  will  become  patient  and  resigned 
and  will  delight  in  nothing. 

27-  When  Jupiter  passes  througL  the  5tL  Louse  from 
the  Moon,  tLe  person  will  get  servants,  prosperity,  sons, 
elephants,  Lorses,  bullocks,  gold,  towns,  houses,  women, 
cloths,  gems  and  good  qualities. 

28.  When  Jupiter  passee  througL  the  Cth  house  from 
the  Moon,  the  person  will  be  so  much  afflicted  at  heart  that 
he  will  take  no  delight  in  the  agreeable  faces  of  beautiful 
women,  in  the  music  of  the  peacock  and  the  cuckoo  and  in 
houses  made  pleasant  by  the  frolic  of  children  playing  like 
the  young  of  the  deer. 

29.  When  Jupiter  passes  through  the  7th  house  from 
the  Moon,  the  person  will  enjoy  a good  bed,  the  company  of 
an  excellent  woman,  wealth,  good  meals,  flowers,  convey- 
ance and  the  like  and  he  will  be  of  good  speech  and  intelli- 
gence. 

30.  When  Jupiter  passes  through  the  8th  house  from 
the  Moon,  the  person  will  suffer  from  imprisonment, diseases, 
heavy  grief,  the  fatigue  of  journey  and  serious  illness. 
When  Jupiter  passes  through  the  9th  house  from  the  Moon 
the  person  will  become  efflcient  at  work  and  influential  and 
he  will  get  sons,  success  in  work,  wealth  and  grain. 

31.  When  Jupiter  passes  through  th  e 10th  house  from 
the  Moon,  the  person  will  quit  his  place  and  suffer  loss  of 
health  and  wealth.  When  Jupiter  passes  through  the  11th 
house,  the  person  will  return  to  his  country  and  will  recover 
his  health  and  wealth.  When  Jupiter  passes  through  the 
I2th  house,  the  person  will  suffer  grief  in  his  return  journey. 

32.  W hen  Venus  passes  through  the  sign  occupied  by 
the  Moon  at  tlie  time  of  birth  of  a person,  such  person 
will  enjoy  excellent  perfumes,  flowers,  clothS;  houses, bed, 


CH.  57.] 


RRIEAT  SAMIIITA 


240 


meals  ami  women.  When  Venus  ])asses  tlirougli  the  2nd 
liouse  from  tlie  Moon,  llie  person  will  get  sons,  wealth, 
grain  and  presents  from  the  king;  will  liave  a pn/stierous 
family,  will  enjoy  flowers  and  gems  and  will  bo  of  bidght 
appearance- 

3i.  When  Venus  passes  througli  the  Srd  house  from 
the  Moon,  the  person  will  become  influential,  wealthy  and 
respectable  and  will  return  to  his  place  and  will  get  cloths. 
Ills  enemies  will  meet  with  ruin.  When  Venus  passes 
through  the  4th  house,  the  person  will  get  friends  and  will 
become  greatly  powerful. 

35-  When 'Venus  passes  through  tlie  5th  house,  the 
person  will  become  happy,  will  get  kinsmen,  sons,  wealth 
and  friends  and-will  not  suffer  defeat  by  the  enemy. 

36.  When  Venus  passes  through  the  6th  house  from 
the  Moon,  the  person  will  suffer  disgrace,  will  be  afflicted 
with  diseases  and  will  be  exposed  to  danger-  When  Venus 
passes  through  the  7th  house  the  person  wdll  suffer  injuries 
through  women.  When  Venus  passes  througli  tlie  8tli 
house  from  the  Moon,  the  person  will  get  houses,  articles 
of  luxury  and  beautiful  women. 

37.  When  Venus  passes  through  the  9th  house  from 
the  Moon,  the  person  will  become  virtuous,  happy  and 
Avealthy,  and  he  will  get  plenty  of  cloths.  When  Venus 
passes  through  the  lOth  house  from  the  i\foon,  the  person 
will  suffer  disgrace  and  will  also  suffer  from  quarrels. 

38.  When  Venus  passes  through  the  11  th  house  from 
the  Moon,  the  person  will  get  the  wealth  of  his  friends  and 
will  also  get  perfumes  and  cloths.  When  Venus  passes 
through  the  12tli  liouse  the  per.son  will  get  very  few  cloths. 

19.  AVhen  Saturn  passes  through  the  sign  occupied 
by  the  Moon  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person,  such  person 
will  suffer  from  poison  and  from  fire,  will  quit  his  kinsmen, 

32 


250 


Brihat  samhita 


[CH-  57, 


will  suffer  imprisonment  and  torture,  will  travel  to  foreign 
lands  and  live  with  his  friends  there  ; will  suffer  miseries, 
loss  of  wealth  and  of  sons,  will  suffer  also  from  the  fatigues 
of  foot-journey  and  from  humiliatiorn 

40.  When  Saturn  passes  through  the  2nd  house  from 
the  Moon,  the  person  will  suffer  loss  of  beauty  and  comfort, 
will  become  wmak  and  will  get  wealth  from  other  men  and 
he  will  not  enjoy  this  wealth  long. 

41.  When  Saturn  passes  through  the  3rd  house  from 
the  Moon,  the  person  will  get  wealth,  servants,  articles  of 
enjoyment,  camels,  buffaloes,  horses,  elepjhants,  asses  and 
houses.  He  will  become  influential,  happy,  free  from 
diseases  and  will  become  greatly  powerful  and  wdll  defeat 
his  enemies  in  fight. 

42.  When  Saturn  passes  through  the  4th  house  from 
the  Moon,  the  person  will  be  separated  from  his  friends, 
wealth  and  wife  and  ever  suspecting  evil  in  everything  will 
never  feel  happy. 

43.  When  Saturn  passes  through  the  5th  house  from 
the  Moon,  the  person  will  be  separated  from  his  sons  and 
wealth  and  will  suffer  from  quarrels.  When  Saturn  passes 
through  the  6th  house  from  the  Moon,  the  person  will  be 
freed  from  his  enemies  and  diseases  and  will  enjoy  the 
company  of  women. 

44.  When  Saturn  passes  through  the  7th  or  8th  house 
from  the  Moon,  the  person  will  be  separated  from  his  wife 
and  sons  and  will  travel  on  foot  in  a pitiable  condition. 
When  he  passes  through  the  9th  house,  the  person  will  be 
all  that  was  stated  for  Saturn  passing  through  the  Sth  house 
and  will  besides  suffer  from  hatred,  chest-pain,  imprison- 
ment and  in  consequence  will  not  properly  observe  the 
daily  duties. 


BRIHAT  SAMeiTA 


251 


CH.  57.] 


45-  When  Saturn  pass^^s  tlirough  the  10th  liouse,  the 
person  will  get  work  and  will  suffer  loss  of  wealthy  learning 
and  fame.  When  Saturn  passes  through  the  11th  house 
from  the  iMoon,  the  person  will  beeome  cruel  and  will  get 
women  and  wealtli.  When  Saturn  passes  through  the  12th 
house  from  the  Moon  the  person  will  suffer  much  grief. 


4G.  Though  a-planet  might  be  benefic  to  a person,  he 
produces  benefic  effects  only  according  to  the  nature  of  the 
Dasa  periods  and  the  rank  of  the  person  in  life,  just  in  the 
same  way  as  the  quantity  of  rain  falling  into  a small  cup 
cannot  but  be  SJuall  though  the  rain  be  excessive. 


47.  The  Sym  and  Mars  shall  be  worshipped  with  red 
flowers,  sandal  paste,  the  Vakula  flower  (the  fragrant  flower 
of  Mimusops  Elengi),  gift  of  copper,  gold  and  oxen  to 
Brahmins.  The  Moon  shall  be  worshipped  by  the  gift  of  a 
white  cow.  Venus  shall  be  worshipped  with  white  flowers 
and  by  the  gift  of  silver,  and  sweet  and  nutritious  things. 
Saturn  shall  be  worshipped  by  the  gift  of  black  substances. 
Mei’cury  shall  be  worshipped  by  the  gift  of  gems,  silver  and 
with  the  Tilaka  flower.  Jupiter  shall  be  worshipped  with 
3ml low  flower  and  by  the  gift  of  yellow  substances.  By  the 
worship  of  the  planets,  a person  escapes  all  miseries. 


48.  Evils  indicated  by  the  motion  of  the  planets  may 
be  escaped  by  the  worship  of  the  Brahmins  and  the  Devas, 
by  expiatory  ceremonies,  by  the  recitation  of  mantras  and 
sacred  texts,  by  the  practice  of  austerities,  by  gifts  to 
Brahmins,  by  the  subjugation  of  one’s  passions,  by  moving 
in  the  company  of  Sadhus,  and  by  conversing  with  them. 

49.  The  Sun  and  Mars  produce  their  effects  when 
passing  tlirough  the  first  half  of  a sign;  the  Moon  and 
Saturn  produce  their  effects  when  moving  through  the  2nd 
half  of  a sign.  The  learned  have  declared  so. 


252  bkihat  samhita  [cEf.  57. 

50.  Mercury  produces  lais  effects  throu^’bout  the  period 
of  his  motion  through  a sign. 

51.  When  Jupiter  passes  through  the  middle  of  odd 
signs,  lie  produces  miseries  even  to  the  righteous  and  when 
he  passes  thi'ough  the  6th  house  he  also  reduces  the  person 
to  a condition  of  misery. 

52.  When  a benefic  planet  is  aspected  by  a malefic 
planet  or  when  a mEilefic  [)laneb  is  aspected  by  a benefic 
planet  or  when  a benefic  planet  and  a malefic  planet  occupy 
a sign  together,  in  all  the  above  cases  the  effects  will  be  the 
same. 

53.  The  good  effects  assigned  to  a planet  will  fail  if 
such  planet  occupies  his  depression  sign  or  an  inimical  sign 
or  if  he  be  an  Astangata  planet  or  if  he  be  aspected  b}^  an 
inimical  planet~and  a person  can  as  little  enjoy  them  as  the 
blind  can  enjoy  the  beauties  of  a woman. 

54.  Saturn  will  produce  effects  in  just  the  same  way 
as  the  Sun — just  as  the  Ariagiti  (metre)  follows  the  rules 
of  the  VytEiii  metre  and  the  Magadhigadha  follows  the  rules 

of  Aria. 

55.  If  Saturn  be  au  Astangata  planet  or  if  be  be 
about  to  disappear  by  conjunction  with  the  Sun  he  will 
nob  produce  miseries  to  the  righteous- 

56.  The  Moon  partakes  of  the  diameter  of  the  planet 
who  ocenpif^s  the  same  house  with  her — just  in  the  same 
way  as  the  face  assumes  the  character  of  the  mind. 

57.  If  the  planets  occupy  malefic  places  a person  will 
lose  his  importance  i.e.  become  light  just  in  the  same  way 
as  the  5bh  letter  of  all  the  four  feet  and  7th  letter  of  the 
2nd  and  4th  feet  become  sliort — these  restrictions  apply  to 
the  Anushtup  metre  (in  which  this  stanza  is  written.) 

58.  Planets  occupying  benefic  places  always  produce 
good  effects. 


cu.  57.1 


BRIHAT  SAilHITA. 


2u3 


59.  If  plf\ncts  do  not  occupy  l^enefic  places,  all^tliat  a 
person  may  do  to  promote  Ins  welfare  will  only  pi‘(,)VB 
injorious  to  liim  just  in  the  same  way  as  the  ceremony  of 
exoi’csm  of  the  ghost  injures  a ])erson  when  not  properly 
conducted. 

<30.  A king  who  starts  on  a journey  when  the  planets 
ai'e  in  benefic  places  will  gain  hia  object  though  he  might 
possess  little  power.' 

61.  On  a Sunday  and  when  the  Sun  occupies  an 
Upachaya  Sign  (the  ?rd,  Gth,  10th  and  11th  houses)^,  shall 
be  done  any  work^or  business  connected  with  gold,  copper, 
a horse,  dried  sticks,  bones,  skin,  woollen  blankets,  hills, 
the  bark  of  trees,  nails,  serpents,  thieves,  weapons,  forest, 
service  under  a tyrannical  prince,  sacred  ba.th,  medicine, 
white  silk,  articles  for  sale,  she[)her(ls,  impenetrable  paths, 
cures,  atones,  works  of  art,  pure  articles,  well-known  objects, 
valiant  fight  and  works  connected  with  fire.  The  same 
work  shall  be  done  when  the  Sun  occupies  the  lising  sign. 

On  Mondays  or  when  the  M >on  occujfies  the  rising 
sign  or  when  she  oecupies  one  of  the  Kendras  shall  be  done 
any  work  or  business  connected  with  jewels,  conch  sliells, 
pearls,  [iioductions  of  water,  silver,  sacrificial  rites,  sugar 
canes,  articles  of  food,  women,  milk,  milk-trees,  the  branches 
of  trees,  crops  of  web  low  lands,  liquids,  Bi ahmins,  horses, 
the  woi’k  of  cooling, horned  animals,  the  cultivation  of  lands, 
the  summoning  of  a commander  of  armies,  the  king,  popu- 
lar favor,  the  demons,  phlegmatic  substances,  elephants, 
flowers  aud  cloths. 

On  Tuesdays  shall  be  done  any  work  or  business  con- 
nected with  mineral  mines,  gold,  fire,  corals,  weapons,  theft, 
torture,  forests,  impenetrable  places  corarmind  over  armies, 
trees  of  red  flowers,  all  red  substances,  bitter  substances, 
pungent  sub&taiiceg,  works  of  art,  seipents,  ro|  cs,  young 


254 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA 


[CH.  57. 


men  that  live  by  deaHng»in  these, physicians,  Budhist  asce- 
tics, working  by  night,  white  silk,  cheating  and  foppery. 

On  Wedneesdays,  and  wlien  Mercury  occupies  tlie  rising 
sign^  shall  be  done  any  woil^  or  business  connected  with 
emeiahls,  lands,  perfumes,  cloths,  plays,  knowledge  of  sci- 
ence, skill  in  work  literary  performances,  arts,  magical  for- 
mulae, metal ic  work,  law  suit,  acts  of  ability,articles  for  sale, 
practice  of  austerities  and  Yoga  piuctice,  messengers,  pro- 
raofion  of  long  life,  deceit,  lies,  bathing,  objects  either  long 
or  short,  dependence  on  other  men  for  help  and  important 
works. 

62.  On  Thursdays  shall  be  done  any  work  or  business  con- 
nected with  gold,  silver,  horses,  elephants,  oxen,  physicians, 
medicinal  })lants,  the  Brahmins,  the  Pi tris  and  the  Devas, 
umbrellas,  fans,  ornaments,  kings,  temples,alms-honses,  aus- 
picious deeds,  science,  beautiful  objects,  fruitful  objects, 
truthful  words,  the  practice  of  austerities,  sacred  fire  and 

wealth. 

63.  On  Fridays  shall  be  done  any  work  or  business 
connected  with  painting,  cloths,  spermatic  drugs,  friendship 
with  prostitutes,  buffoonery,  the  pleasures  of  the  youth 
beauriful  places,  crystals,  silver,  enjoyment  of  flowers,  per- 
fumes and  the  like,  conveyances,  sugar  canes,  autumn  crops, 
cows,  tradesmen,  farmers,  medicine  and  the  productions  of 
water. 

On  Saturdays  shall  be  done  any  work  or  business  cou- 
necled  with  a bnffaloe,  a goat,  a camel, black  metal,  a servant, 
an  old  man,  any  low  deeds,  a bird,  a thief,  rope  works, 
wicked  persons,  pot-shreds  and  obstructions. 

64.  Thus  have  been  desci  ibed  the  effects  of  the  motions 
of  tho  planets  through  the  signs  of  the  Zodiac  by  Yaraha 

Mihiia  in  a variety  of  sweet  metres  after  examining  the 
science  of  prosody. 


CH.  1)8.] 


ERUIAT  SAMIIITA 


255 


CnAPTEIl  LVIII  (105). 

On  The  Worship  Op  The  Naksiiatra  Purusiia 
Or  The  Stellar  Deity. 

1.  ''Fho  asten'srn  of  Mnla  forms  the  feet  of  tl.e  Xakslia- 
tra  Purnslin.  The  asterisms  of  Rohini  and  Aswini  form 
liis  shanks  ; those  of  P.  Ashadba  and  U.  Aslnidha  form  his 
thighs  and  those  of  P.  Phalgiini  and  U.  Phalguni  form 
the  privity. 

2.  The  asteri^m  of  Krittika  forms  the  lip  of  the 
Nakshatrapnrusha.  Those  of  P.  Bhadrapada  and  U.  Bhadi'a- 
pada  form  his  sides;  that  of  llevati  forms  his  abdomen  ; and 

Jt 

tliat  of  Aimradha  forms  his  breast. 

3.  The  asterism  of  Dhanishta  forms  the  back  of  the 
Nakshatrapnrusha;-  The  asterism  of  Visakha  forms  his 
arms  j that  of  Hasta  forms  his  hands;  that  of  Punarvasu 
his  fingers  and  that  of  Aslesha  his  finger  nails. 

A The  asterism  of  Jyeshta  forms  the  neck  of  the 
Nakshatrapnrusha;  that  of  Sravana  forms  Ids  ears;  th‘t  of 
Pushva  his  face  ; that  of  Swati  his  teeth  ; that  of  Satabhi- 
shak  his  smiles;  that  of  Magha  his  nose  and  that  of  Mriga- 
sirsha  bis  eyes.  \ 

5.  The  asterism  of  Chittra  forms  the  forehead  of  the 
Nakshatrapurusha  ; that  of  Bharaiii  forms  his  head  and  that 
of  Ardra,  his  hairs,  dhus  have  been  described  the  features 
of  the  Nakshatrapurusha. 

6.  A peron  shall  worship  Yishuu  and  the  Naksha- 
trapurusha on  the  8th  lunar  day  of  the  dark  half  of  the 
mouth  of  Chaitra  when  the  Moon  passes  through  th  e as- 
terism of  Moola  and  shall  fast  that  day 

7.  At  the  close  of  the  fasting,  the  person  shall  gieve 
away  to  a Bramin  astronomer  a vessel  tilled  with  ghee  to- 
gether with  gold,  gems  and  cloths  to  the  extent  of  his 
power. 


256 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  58- 


8.  A person,  who.  desires  a bright  and  beautiful  ap- 
pearance, shall  feed  Bramins  witdi  rice  mixed  with  milk, 
irhee  and  sugar  and  shall  fast  on  days  when  the  Moon  pass- 
es through  tdie  several  asterisms  representing  the  features 
of  the  Nashatrapurusha  begining  from  the  feet  and  he 
shall  then  worship  both  Vishnu  and  the  Nakshatra- 
purusha. 

9.  A person  who  fasts  and  worships  as  stated 
above  will  have  long  arms,  broad  and  firm  breast,  a rnoon- 
like  face^  white  be  uithul  teeth,  the  gait  of  an  elephant, 
eyes  long  like  the  leaves  of  the  lotus  and  appeararice  cal- 
culated to  atti  act  the  eyes  of  women  and  a body  as  fine  as 
that  of  cupid. 

10.  A woman  wlio  fasts  and  worships  as  prescribed 
above  will  have  a face  as  bright  and  spotless  as  the  summer 
sun,  eyes  as  softaud  large  as  the  petals  of  the  lotus,  beauti- 
ful teeth,  tine  ears,  and  hairs  as  black  as  the  bee'. 

11.  Her  voice  will  be  sweet  as  that  of  the  cuckoo, 
her  lips  will  be  red,  her  feet  and  hands  will  be  as  soft 
and  bright  as  the  lotus,  her  waist  will  be  thin  and  ben 
with  the  weight  of  her  bosoms  and  her  navel  turning  from 
loft  to  right. 

12.  Her  thighs  will  be  like  the  plantain ; her  but- 
tocks wdll  be  beautiful,  the  cavities  in  the  loins  above  her 
hip  will  be  6ne  and  her  toes  will  be  close. 

13.  A person  who  observes  the  Nakshatrapuriisha 
vrita  (ceremony)  will  after  his  death,  become  a star  and 
along  with  the  innumerable  stars  of  brilliant  lustre,  live  to 
the  end  of  Brahma's  day  (432,000,000  years  after  which 
occurs  tlie  dissolution  of  the  IJuiverse),  At  the  beginning 
of  the  next  kalpa,  the  person  will  first  be  born  a famous 
emperor  and  in  his  next  birth,  he  will  be  born  either  a king 
or  a rich  man  or  a Brahmin. 


257 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


[cn.  59* 


14  S:  15.  The  twelve  months  beginning  from  Marga- 
sirsha  (^November  and  December'^  are  respectively  sacred  to 
Kesava,  Narayana,  Madbava,  Govdnda^  Yisbnu,  Madliu- 
sudana^  Trivikrama,  Vamana,  Sridbara,  Hrisbikesa,  Pad- 
manabba  and  Damodara. 

10.  A person  who,  having  fasted  previosly,,  worships 
Vishnu  on  Dwadesi  days  singing  the  twelve  names  men- 
tioned above  will  be  freed  from  the  trammels  of  re-birth  and 
will  obtain  Salvation. 


CHAPTER  LIX.  (103). 

' Conclusion. 

1.  Planting  the  hill  of  my  learning  in  the  vast  ocean 
of  Jyotisba  Sastra  "and  churning  it.I  have  thus  brought 
out  this  bright  Moon  of  Science  which  sheds  its  light  of 
knowledge  over  the  whole  world. 

2.  0 ye  good  men,  I have  not  omitted  to  mention  any^ 
thing  contained  in  the  old  Sastras  ; you  may  compare  my 
work  with  the  Sastras  and  follow  the  rules  freely. 

3.  If  good  critics  discover  a few  merits  in  an  ocean 
of  demerits, it  is  their  nature  to  bring  the  former  to  the 
notice  of  the  world,  while  the  nature  of  bad  critics  is  just 
the  reverse. 

4.  Exposed  to  the  fire  of  malicious  criticism,  the 
gold  of  a literary  production  becomes  purified.  Every  at- 
tempt must  therefore  be  made  to  bring  a work  to  the  notice 
of  severe  critics. 

5.  If,  in  any  of  the  copies  of  this  work  or  in  the  reci- 
tation of  it  by  persons  who  have  learned  it  from  their 
preceptors,  the  learned  happen  to  notice  any  portion  either 
missing  or  erroneous  or  omitted,  they  will,  it  is  hoped,  set- 
ting aside  all  feelings  of  malice,  correct  the  error  or  supply 
the  omission. 


CH.  59.] 


BRIIiAT  SAMHITA. 


2o3 


6.  By  the  blessing  of  the  Sun,  the  Sages  and  the 
reverened  preceptors  worshipped  by  me,  I have  been  able 
to  write  this  brief  treatise.  Salutation  to  the  ancient  writers 
of  Sunhita. 

END, 


I ■ lutnrmi'^ 


